
How to Know God: The Soul's Journey Into the Mystery of Mysteries 


ENDORSEMENTS 


"I congratulate Dr. Deepak Chopra for this wonderful book, reaching out to many, many readers, on 
the subject of spirituality, but with a scientific approach. And I absolutely agree with Dr. Chopra's 
view that 'if we want to change the world, we have to begin by changing ourselves.' This is the same 
message that I have always been conveying." 

The Dalai Lama 


"The most important book about God for our times. Deepak Chopra is an amazing combination of 
William James and Shankara. In this book he has built for us a magical stairway to ascend to life- 
changing experience of the sacred, keeping our scientific outlook and an ever more open heart and 
mind." 

Robert Thurman, Ph.D., 
professor of religion, 

Columbia University 


"Deepak Chopra has introduced literally millions of people to the spiritual path, and for this we should 
all be profoundly grateful. In How to Know God, Deepak continues his pioneering outreach, showing 
that God consciousness unfolds in a series of stages, each important and remarkable in itself, yet each 
getting closer to Source. This is at once a map of Spirit, and a map of your own deepest Self, for in the 
last analysis, they are one and the same." 

Ken Wilber, author of 
Integral Psychology 


"Spiritual health and moral responsibility are two of the most precious gifts that any leader can offer. 
Few thinkers have done as much as Deepak Chopra to allow millions to embrace the project of 
personal and social transformation. I agree completely with Dr. Chopra's insight that 'if we want to 
change the world, we have to begin by changing ourselves.' In a world where overcoming poverty, 
inequality, greed, and cynicism will be the great human challenges of the twenty-first century, Deepak 
Chopra offers life-affirming suggestions for developing a more just and peaceful society." 

Oscar Arias, 
president of Costa Rica 
(1986-1990), 1987 Nobel Peace 
Prize Laureate 


"Deepak Chopra has blessed the world by spreading the light of vedic knowledge and the timeless 
teachings on nonduality. Vedanta has inspired and transformed the lives of seekers for thousands of 
years. However, every age needs a voice that can articulate ancient Wisdom in a contemporary 
framework. Dr. Chopra has given the seekers of self-knowledge a clear and scientific road map to 
understand and realize the ultimate reality. I congratulate him for his brilliant work." 

His Holiness Vasudevanand Saraswati, 

Jagad Guru Shankracharya of 
Jyotirmath World Headquarters 
established by Adi Shankara 
(sage-philosopher of India 
A.D. 686-718) 


"This is a profound and accessible exploration of the experience of God, including an understanding of 
it in biological and scientific terms. How to Know’ God is both fascinating and uplifting." 



Andrew Weil, M.D., director of the 
Program in Integrative Medicine at 
the University of Arizona 


"One of the best books ever written about a subject that more people think about than anything else." 

Larry King, host of Larry King Live, 


CNN 


"A renowned physician and author, Deepak Chopra is undoubtedly one of the most lucid and inspired 
philosophers of our times." 

Mikhail Gorbachev, president, 

Citation of the Medal of the 
Presidency of the Italian Republic 
awarded by the Pio Manzu 
International Scientific Committee 


"Deepak Chopra has really done it this time — a brilliant, scholarly yet lyrical synthesis of 
neuroscience, quantum physics, personal reminiscence, Eastern, Western, and spiritual thinking. Dr. 
Chopra's new theory of seven stages of understanding God is extremely relevant to the ongoing 
transformation in medicine today from the old soul-less paradigm to the new one with spirituality and 
emotions occupying center stage. This will be the Bible of the New Medicine, the scientifically 
accurate medicine that will replace the dying reductionist old thinking." 

Candace B. Pert, Ph.D., research 
professor at Georgetown University 
School of Medicine, department 
of physiology and biophysics, 

Washington, D.C., and author of 
Molecules of Emotion: The Science Behind 
Mind-Body Medicine 


"How to Know God should be on the night table of every seeker of truth and Spirit. Even better, every 
seeker should keep it with them at all times as they travel on their soul's journey." 

Shirley MacLaine, actress and author 
of The Camino and Out on a Limb 


"In the tradition not only of William James but especially Carl Gustav Jung, Deepak Chopra finds the 
soul where it belongs, an essential element of being and links spirituality to human needs. In the spirit 
of Abraham Maslow's The Farther Reaches of Human Nature, he carries stages of 
development/potentiality even beyond self-actualization and peak experience. Chopra sees the soul as 
the culmination of an evolution that enables man to find God. Most importantly, he puts ways of 
experiencing God in a development sequence, ontogeny recapitulating phylogeny spiritually as well as 
biologically. 'God is a process.' It is appropriate that Deepak Chopra, who previously dealt with 
physical health, now approaches spirituality in a similarly inspired way, since growing evidence 
suggests the two may be linked." 

George Freeman Solomon, M.D., 
professor of psychiatry and 
biobehavioral sciences, emeritus, 

University of California, Los Angeles 



"Deepak continues to lead us even deeper into the mysteries and joys of true spirituality." 

James Redfield, author of The Celestine 
Prophecy and The Secret of Shamhhala 


"For the thousand years which preceded modernity, the world was G-d intoxicated. Theology was 
man's greatest pursuit embraced by the earth's leading minds. Then along came mind-numbing sound 
bites about the deity — 'G-d is love,' 'May the Force be with you' — which propelled the knowledge of 
G-d back to its infancy. Deepak Chopra's profound and insightful book inspires us once again to 
apprehend G-d in all His majesty and all His glory. Hats off to Deepak for restoring awe and mystery 
to the grandest of all subjects." 

Rabbi Shmuley Boteach, author of 
Kosher Sex and An Intelligent Person's Guide 
to Judaism 


"Deepak Chopra takes a scientific as well as spiritual approach to the ultimate mystery of life, giving 
us a breathtaking and awe-inspiring version of Divinity and ourselves. After reading How to Know > 
God, you'll have a much deeper understanding of who you are and your role in the universe." 

Joan Borysenko, Ph.D., author of Seven 
Paths to God and A Woman 's Journey to God 


"Just when I think he can't go any deeper, he does. With How to Know God, Deepak Chopra makes it 
clear: we have in our midst a spiritual genius." 

Marianne Williamson, author of 
Return to Love and Enchanted Love 


"This book will be a very challenging book for those who read it as it was for the adventurous author 
who wrote it. The philosophical and theological differences raised by scholars from other traditions 
make the book even more inviting for reflection and discussion. I personally found the book both 
rewarding and exciting and have enjoyed immensely the serious discussion it provoked. With this 
work Dr. Chopra moves his many talents from the arena of the medical to the realm of the spiritual, 
and in so doing 'awakens' our consciousness, which is what spirituality is all about in the first place." 

Father J. Francis Stroud, S.J., executive 
director of DeMello Spirituality 
Center, Fordham University 


"A brilliant mind has created a book which should be read by believers and nonbelievers. It is a 
treasure chest of knowledge that everyone should open and explore regardless of one's belief or faith. 
The knowledge presented can change your life." 

Bemie S. Siegel, M.D., author 
of Love, Medicine and Miracles 
and Prescriptions for Living 


"Deepak offers a fresh, gorgeous, and illuminating approach to the perennial quest to know God. This 
work of wisdom beautifully weaves religion, quantum physics, and neuroscience in practical, powerful 
ways to awaken the reader." 

Harold H. Bloomfield, M.D., 
best-selling author of Healing Anxiety 
Naturally and Making Peace with Your Past 



"This is a very wise book about consciousness and our connection with the Divine. It is a marvelous 
advance beyond the morbid, godless messages of materialistic science. Above all, it is about waking 
up to who we really are: infinite, immortal, eternal. No matter what your religious inclinations may be, 
you can find affirmation, joy, and fulfillment in these pages." 

Larry Dossey, M.D., author of 
Reinventing Medicine and Healing Words 


"There is a paradigm shift going on, and Deepak Chopra, M.D., is one of its most popular and 
eloquent spokespersons. In this new paradigm, consciousness, popularly called God, is the ground of 
all being. Opponents often ask, So how do I know this consciousness? Certainly my ego is nothing 
like you describe! Now Chopra has given a very readable response in How to Know God. It is not easy 
to know God, says Chopra correctly, because God is separated from us by a discontinuity. Chopra 
explains this beautifully using quantum physics and relativity theory. But you can know God with 
God's Grace, assures Chopra, as he gives many steps to follow. If you want to investigate Reality or 
God, especially if you are a beginner, this book will be of real help." 

Amit Goswami, professor, department 
of physics, University of Oregon, and 
author of The Self-Aware Universe and 
Quantum Creativity 


"The ultimate how-to book! Brilliant!" 

Dean Ornish, M.D., founder and 
president of the Preventive Medicine 
Research Institute; clinical professor of 
medicine, UCSF School of Medicine, 
and author of Love & Survival and 
Dr. Dean Ornish's Program for Reversing 
Heart Disease 


"Very simply, the most profoundly enlightening book I have ever read. I am in awe at the depth of 
feeling on these pages — Astounding — Brilliant — A course in knowing God, rather than knowing about 
God." 

Wayne W. Dyer 


"This book opens the door to the new millennium with a quantum leap into the world of Infinite 
creativity. Who is God? Are you God? Can you experience God directly? In this groundbreaking road 
map to the ultimate awakening, Deepak Chopra emerges as the scientist of the inner world. He shows 
us step by step how we can meet God face-to-face. This book is a must for those who are ready to 
enter the new millennium as blissful, creative, multi-dimensional beings." 

Margot Anand, author of 
The Art of Everyday Ecstasy 


"In his personal search for spiritual truths, Deepak has discovered definitions so simple and pure that 
they can change a life in the blink of an eye. I promise that there are readers who will need to do 
nothing more than open this book at a random page and read any line on which their eye lights — and 
that line will rewrite their lives. An extraordinary claim? Try it for yourself." 

Uri Geller, author/paranonnalist, 

Sonning, England 



"It is a cri de coeur by one of the most brilliant minds of our time." 

Rustum Roy, Evan Pugh Professor of 
the Solid State; professor of science, 
technology and society; and professor 
of geochemistry; Pennsylvania State 
University 


"The true gift of How to Know God is that it is about getting to know ourselves. God is the mirror in 
which we reveal ourselves to ourselves. Deepak Chopra shows that we cannot have an angry righteous 
god without being governed inwardly and unconsciously by fear. Likewise if we have a loving god we 
ourselves have a visionary sense of our own infinite potential. The legacy of this book is the true 
legacy of every human life: the depths to which we have made God in our own hearts." 

Richard Moss, M.D., author of Words 
That Shine Both Ways, The Second Miracle, 

The Black Butterfly, and The I That Is We 


"In How to Know God, Deepak Chopra teaches us to recognize our everyday lives as the raw material 
of our spiritual evolution. By reclaiming science as a thread through our spiritual labyrinth, he 
connects the big questions of meaning, God, and immortality — once the exclusive province of 
theologians and philosophers — with our daily existence. And he does it all with his infectious sense of 
awe and wonder." 

Arianna Huffmgton, syndicated 
columnist and author of 
The Fourth Instinct 


"With astonishing insight and breathtaking clarity, Deepak Chopra has here answered the only 
question that has ever really mattered. The human race will remember this time in our history as the 
moment when the final veil was lifted from the face of God." 

Neale Donald Walsch, author of 
Conversations with God 


"With childlike awe and wonder, in words of elegant simplicity, Deepak Chopra invites us to 
effortlessly discover the mystery of life. Embracing the challenge in gratitude for every grace-filled 
moment, readers are irresistibly drawn to enjoy the fulfillment of Life's all-encompassing purpose: 'To 
know, love, and serve God with our whole mind, our whole soul, our whole heart, and to love our 
neighbor as ourself.' This work of love offers an 'in-the-body' transformative experience assessible to 
all who choose to accept it." 

Sister Judian Breitenbach, Catholic 
Order of the Poor Handmaid of Jesus 
Christ, The Healing Arts Center on 
the River, Mishawaka, Indiana 


"This remarkable book, called How to Know God, expresses so profoundly a universal message of the 
unity of spiritual ideals. It also generously offers a glimpse of the 'Divine' which becomes more and 
more accessible to readers of all beliefs as the words gradually disclose magic nourishment to mind, 
heart and soul. While turning the pages, one by one, cascades of revelation come flowing out, washing 
away all preconceived ideas and dogmatic hindrances which have dominated religious thinking all 
down the ages. As all barriers between the material and the spiritual worlds crumble through the 
power of the all-pervading light shining into the heart, the reader is placed face to face with the 



greatest of all mysteries, losing thereby the illusion of the self, a process which Deepak Chopra 
illustrates with sublime inspiration." 

Hidayat Inayat-Khan 
Pir-o-Murshid, spiritual head and 
representative general, 

International Sufi Movement 


Also by Deepak Chopra 
* * * 


Creating Health 
Return of the Rishi 
Quantum Healing 
Perfect Health 
Unconditional Life 

Ageless Body, 
Timeless Mind 

Journey into Healing 
Creating Affluence 
Perfect Weight 
Restful Sleep 

The Seven Spiritual 
Laws of Success 
The Return of Merlin 
Boundless Energy 
Perfect Digestion 


The Way of the Wizard 
Overcoming Addictions 
Raid on the Inarticulate 
The Path to Love 
The Seven Spiritual 
Laws for Parents 
The Love Poems of Rumi 

(edited by Deepak Chopra; 
translated by Deepak Chopra 
and Fereydoun Kia) 

Healing the Heart 
Everyday Immortality 
The Lords of the Light 
On the Shores 
of Eternity 


DEEPAK 

CHOPRA 



Harmony Books ! New York 


HOW 

TO 

KNOW 

GOD 


The Soul's Journey into the 
Mystery of Mysteries 



FOR HERMS ROMIJN 


Copyright © 2000 Deepak Chopra, M.D. 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher. 

Published by Harmony Books, 

201 East 50th Street, New York, New York 10022. 

Member of the Crown Publishing Group. 

Random House, Inc. New York, Toronto, 

London, Sydney, Auckland 
www.randomhouse.com 

HARMONY BOOKS is a registered trademark 
and Harmony Books' colophon is a trademark 
of Random House, Inc. 

Printed in the United States of America 

Design by Jennifer Ann Daddio 

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Chopra, Deepak. 

How to know God : the soul's journey into the mystery of mysteries 
/ Deepak Chopra. — 1 st ed. 

1. Experience (Religion) 2. God — Knowableness. 

3. Spiritual life. 1. Title. 

BL53C49 2000 
29 1 .4'4 — dc21 99-42777 
CIP 

ISBN 0-609-60078-8 
1098765432 1 
First Edition 


CONTENTS 


A Real and Useful God 

1 

Mystery of Mysteries 

27 

Seven Stages of God 

40 

Stage One: God the Protector 

51 

Stage Two: God the Almighty 

67 

Stage Three: God of Peace 

83 

Stage Four: God the Redeemer 

101 

Stage Five: God the Creator 

118 

Stage Six: God of Miracles 

136 

Stage Seven: God of Pure Being — "I Am " 

158 

God Is as We Are 

180 

A Manual for Saints 

190 

Spiritual Awakening 

203 


The Mind Field 211 

5. Strange Powers 224 

Inspiration and Insight 226 

Geniuses, Child Prodigies, and Savants 230 

Memory of Former Lifetimes 237 

Telepathy and ESP 246 

Alter Egos (Multiple Personality Syndrome) 250 

Synchronicity 255 

Clairvoyance and Prophecy 260 

6. Contacting God 267 

A Map of the Soul 273 

The State of Union 288 

The Power of Intention 298 

Endnotes and Further Reading 306 


In what concerns divine things, belief is not appropriate. 
Only certainty will do. 

Anything less than certainty is unworthy of God. 

—SIMONE WEIL 


One 

A REAL AND 
USEFUL GOD 


God has managed the amazing feat of being worshiped and invisible at the same time. 
Millions of people might describe him as a white-bearded father figure sitting on a throne in 
the sky, but none could claim to be an eyewitness. Although it doesn’t seem possible to offer a 
single fact about the Almighty that would hold up in a court of law, somehow the vast 
majority of people believe in God — as many as 96 percent, according to some polls. This 
reveals a huge gap between belief and what we call everyday reality. We need to heal this 
gap. 

What would the facts be like if we had them? They would be as follows. Everything that 
we experience as material reality is bom in an invisible realm beyond space and time, a realm 
revealed by science to consist of energy and information. This invisible source of all that 
exists is not an empty void but the womb of creation itself. Something creates and organizes 
this energy. It turns the chaos of quantum soup into stars, galaxies, rain forests, human beings, 
and our own thoughts, emotions, memories, and desires. In the pages that lie ahead we will 
see that it is not only possible to know this source of existence on an abstract level but to 
become intimate and at one with it. When this happens, our horizons open to new realities. 

We will have the experience of God. 

After centuries of knowing God through faith, we are now ready to understand divine 
intelligence directly. In many ways this new knowledge reinforces what spiritual traditions 
have already promised. God is invisible and yet performs all miracles. He is the source of 
every impulse of love. Beauty and truth are both children of this God. In the absence of 
knowing the infinite source of energy and creativity, life's miseries come into being. Getting 
close to God through a true knowing heals the fear of death, confirms the existence of the 
soul, and gives ultimate meaning to life. 

Our whole notion of reality has actually been topsy-turvy. Instead of God being a vast, 
imaginary projection, he turns out to be the only thing that is real, and the whole universe, 
despite its immensity and solidity, is a projection of God's nature. Those astonishing events 
we call miracles give us clues to the workings of this ineffable intelligence. Consider the 
following story. 

In 1924 an old French villager is walking home. With one eye lost in the Great War and 
the other severely damaged by mustard gas in the trenches, he can barely see. The setting sun 
is bright, so the old man is completely unaware of the two youths on bicycles who have 
wheeled around the corner and are barreling down on him. 

At the moment of impact an angel appears. He takes the lead bicycle by its two wheels, 
lifts it a few feet in the air, and sets it down safely on the grass beside the road. The second 
bicycle stops short, and the youths become tremendously excited. "There are two! There are 
two!" one of them shouts, meaning that instead of just the old man alone, two figures are 
standing in the road. The entire village becomes very worked up, claiming afterward that the 
youths were drunk or else they made up this fantastic tale. As for the old man, when he is 
asked about it, he says he doesn't understand the question. 

Could we ever come to an answer ourselves? As it happens, the old man was a priest, Pere 
Jean Lamy, and the appearance of the angel has come down to us through his own testimony 
before his death. Lamy, who was saintly and beloved, seems to be credited with many 
instances where God sent angels or other forms of divine aid. Although reluctant to talk about 
them, his attitude was matter-of-fact and modest. Because of Lamy's religious vocation, it is 
easy to dismiss this incident as a story for the devout. Skeptics would not be moved. 

Yet I am fascinated simply by whether it could have happened, whether we can open the 
door and allow helpful angels into our reality, along with miracles, visions, prophecy, and 
ultimately that great outsider, God himself. 

We all know that a person can learn about life without religion. If I took a hundred 
newborn babies and filmed every moment of their lives from beginning to end, it wouldn’t be 



possible to predict that the believers in God will turn out to be happier, wiser, or more 
successful than the nonbelievers. Yet the video camera cannot record what is happening 
below the surface. Someone who has experienced God may be looking on the entire world 
with wonder and joy. Is this experience real? Is it useful to our lives or just a subjective event, 
full of meaning to the person having it but otherwise no more practical than a dream? 

One bald fact stands at the beginning of any search for God. He leaves no footprints in the 
material world. From the very beginning of religion in the West, it was obvious that God had 
some kind of presence, known in Hebrew as Shekhinah. Sometimes this word is simply 
translated as "light" or radiance. Shekhinah formed the halos around angels and the luminous 
joy in the face of a saint. It was feminine, even though God, as interpreted in the Judeo- 
Christian tradition, is masculine. The significant fact about Shekhinah was not its gender, 
however. Since God is infinite, calling the deity He or She is just a human convention. !*) 
Much more important was the notion that if God has a presence, that means he can be 
experienced. 

He can be known. This is a huge point, because in every other way God is understood to be 
invisible and untouchable. And unless some small part of God touches the material world, he 
will remain inaccessible forever. 

We personify God as a convenient way of making him more like ourselves. He would be a 
very perverse and cruel human, however, to remain so hidden from us while demanding our 
love. What could possibly give us confidence in any kind of benevolent spiritual Being when 
thousands of years of religion have been so stained by bloodshed? 

We need a model that is both part of religion yet not bounded by it. The following simple, 
three-part scheme fits our common-sense view of God. Shaped like a reality sandwich, this 
scheme can be pictured as follows: 


God 

TRANSITION ZONE 

Material world 

The picture is not new in its top and bottom layers, placing God above the material world 
and removed from it. God must be separate from us, or else we would be able to see him here, 
strolling about as he did in the Book of Genesis. There, after the seven days of creation, God 
walked in the garden of Eden, enjoying his handiwork in the cool of the evening. 

Only the middle element of our diagram, called the transition zone, is new or unusual. A 
transition zone implies that God and humans meet on common ground. Somewhere miracles 
take place, along with holy visions, angels, enlightenment, and hearing the voice of God. All 
of these extraordinary phenomena bridge two worlds: They are real and yet they are not part 
of a predictable cause-and-effect. To put it another way, if we stubbornly cling to material 
reality as the only way to know anything, skepticism about God is totally justified. Miracles 
and angels defy reason, and even though holy visions may be catalogued time after time, the 
rational mind remains defiant, defending its sure grip on the material plane. 

"You really think God exists? Well, let's break it down. You're a doctor, I'm a doctor. 
Either God is causing these diseases we see every day, or else he can't do anything to stop 
them. Which one is the God you want me to accept?" 

This voice is from a skeptical colleague I used to make rounds with in the hospital, a 
confirmed atheist. 

"I don't want you to accept either one," I would protest. 

But he would press the point. "Reality is reality. We don't have to argue over whether an 
enzyme or hormone is real, do we? God can't survive any kind of objective test. But we all 
know that. Some of us just choose not to keep on fooling ourselves." 


On one level he was right. Materialist arguments against God remain powerful because 
they are based on facts, but they fall apart once you dive deeper than the material world. 

Dame Julian of Norwich lived in England in the fourteenth century. Dame Julian asked God 
directly why he had created the world. The answer came back to her in ecstatic whispers: 

You want to know your lord's meaning in what I have done? Know it well, love was his 
meaning. Who reveals it to you? Love. What did he reveal to you? Love. Why does he 
reveal it to you? For love. 

For Dame Julian God was something to eat, drink, breathe, and see everywhere, as though 
she were an infatuated lover. Yet since the divine was her lover, she was elevated to cosmic 
heights, where the whole universe was "a little thing, the size of a hazelnut, lying in the palm 
of my hand." 

When saints go almost mad with rapture, we find their expressions both baffling and yet 
very understandable. Although we have all gotten used to the absence of the sacred, we 
appreciate that journeys into the transition zone, the layer closer to God, continue to happen. 

The experience of God feels like flying. It feels as if I'm walking above the ground with 
such equilibrium that nothing can sway me from my path. It's like being the eye of the 
storm. I see without judgment or opinion. I just watch as everything passes in and out of 
my awareness like clouds. (1) 

This uplifting experience, which is common to saints and mystics, is the record of a 
quantum journey. There are no known physical mechanisms that trigger it, yet feeling close to 
God occurs in every age, among all peoples. We're all capable of going beyond our material 
bonds, yet we often fail to value this ability. Although we hear in church or temple or mosque 
that God is love, he doesn't seem to exert much passionate attraction anymore. 

I don't believe saints and mystics are really so different from other human beings. If we 
look at our reality sandwich, the transition zone turns out to be subjective: This is where 
God's presence is felt or seen. Anything subjective must involve the brain, since it takes 
millions of neurons firing together before you can have any experience. 

Now our search has narrowed down in a way that looks very promising: God's presence, 
his light, becomes real if we can translate it into a response of the brain, which I will call the 
"God response." We can get even more specific. Floly visions and revelations aren't random. 
They fall into seven definite events taking place inside the brain. These responses are much 
more basic than your beliefs, but they give rise to beliefs. They bridge from our world to an 
invisible domain where matter dissolves and spirit emerges: 

1 . Fight-or-flight response: the response that enables us to survive in the face of danger. 
This response is linked to a God who wants to protect us. He is like a parent who looks 
out for the safety of a small child. We turn to this God because we need to survive. 


2. Reactive response: this is the brain's creation of a personal identity. Beyond mere 
survival, everyone pursues the needs of "I, me, mine." We do this instinctively, and 
from this response a new God emerges, one who has power and might, laws and rules. 
We turn to this God because we need to achieve, accomplish, and compete. 


3. Restful awareness response: the brain can be active or at rest, and this is its response 
when it wants peace. Rest and activity alternate in every part of the brain. The divine 
equivalent is a God who brings peace, who enables us to find a calm center in the 
midst of outward chaos. We turn to this God because we need to feel that the outer 
world isn't going to swallow us up in its endless turmoil. 


4. Intuitive response: the brain looks for information both inside and out. Outer 

knowledge is objective, but inner knowledge is intuitive. No one checks with an expert 
outside themselves before saying "I am happy" or "I am in love." We rely on our 
ability to know ourselves from the inside out. The God that matches this response is 
understanding and forgiving. We need him to validate that our inner world is good. 


5. Creative response: the human brain can invent new things and discover new facts. 
This creative ability apparently comes from nowhere — the unknown simply gives 
birth to a new thought. We call this inspiration, and its mirror is a Creator who made 
the whole world from nothing. We turn to him out of our wonder at the beauty and 
formal complexity of Nature. 


6. Visionary response: the brain can directly contact "the light," a form of pure 

awareness that feels joyful and blessed. This contact can be bewildering, because it 
has no roots in the material world. It comes as a vision, and the God that matches it is 
exalted — he delivers healing and miracles. We need such a God to explain why magic 
can exist side by side with ordinary mundane reality. 


7. Sacred response: the brain was born from a single fertilized cell that had no brain 
functions in it, only a speck of life. Even though a hundred billion neurons developed 
from that speck, it remains intact in all its innocence and simplicity. The brain senses 
this as its source and origin. To match it, there is a God of pure being, one who doesn't 
think but just is. We need him because without a source, our existence has no 
foundation at all. 

These seven responses, all very real and useful to us in our long journey as a species, form 
the unshakable basis of religion. If you compare any two minds — Moses or Buddha, Jesus or 
Freud, Saint Francis or Chairman Mao — each projects a different view of reality with a 
matching God. No one can shoehorn God into a single box. We must have a range of vision as 
vast as human experience itself. Atheists need their God, who is absent and nonexistent, while 
at the other extreme mystics need their God, one of pure love and light. Only the brain can 
deliver this vast range of deities. 

You might immediately object that the human mind creates these versions of God, not just 
the brain. I absolutely agree — in the long run the mind is much more primary than the brain in 
creating all perception. But for now the brain is our only concrete way of entering the mind. 

In cartoons a lightbulb shows up over somebody's head when he has a bright idea; this isn’t so 
in real life. The mind without the brain is as invisible and improvable as God. 

Also, you might argue that just because God is seen in a certain way by us, that doesn't 
mean he is that way. I don't believe this is black or white. God's reality doesn't stand apart 
from our perceptions but is woven into them. A mother can see her newborn child as 



wonderful and worthy, and through her perception that baby grows up to become a wonderful, 
worthy person. This is one of the mysteries of love. A subtle give-and-take is going on at the 
deepest level between parent and child. In the same way God seems to grow directly out of 
our deepest inner values. There is a similar give-and-take below the level of mere belief. Peel 
away all the layers of an onion, and at the center you will find emptiness; peel away all the 
layers of a human being, and at the center you will find the seed of God. 

I believe that God has to be known by looking in the mirror. 

If you see yourself in fear, barely holding on with survival at stake, yours is a God 
of fight or flight. 

If you see yourself as capable of power and accomplishment, yours is a God of the 
reactive response. 

If you see yourself as centered and calm, yours is a God of the restful awareness 
response. 

If you see yourself as growing and evolving, yours is a God of the intuitive 
response. 

If you see yourself as someone who makes personal dreams come true, yours is a 
God of the creative response. 

If you see yourself as capable of working miracles, yours is a God of the visionary 
response. 

If you see yourself as one with God, yours is a God of the sacred response. 


Although everyone's brain can create countless thoughts — just to take a number, at ten 
thoughts a minute, a single brain would conjure up more than 14,000 thoughts a day, 5 
million a year, and 350 million in a lifetime. To preserve our sanity, the gross majority of 
these thoughts are repetitions of past thoughts, mere echoes. The brain is economical in how it 
produces a thought. Instead of having millions of ways, it has only a limited number. 
Physicists like to say that the universe is really just "quantum soup" bombarding our senses 
with billions of bits of data every minute. This swirling chaos must also be organized into a 
manageable number. So the brain, with its seven basic responses, provides more than sanity 
and meaning: it provides a whole world. Presiding over this self-created world is a God who 
embraces everything, but who also must fit into the brain's way of working. 

In one way or another, when a person says the word God, he is pointing to a specific 
response from this list: 


Any 

Any 

Any 

Any 

intuitive 

Any 

Any 

Any 


God who protects us like a father or mother stems from fight or flight. 

God who makes laws and rules over society stems from the reactive response. 

God who brings inner peace stems from the restful awareness response. 

God who encourages human beings to reach their full potential stems from the 
response. 

God who inspires us to explore and discover stems from the crea tive response. 
God who makes miracles stems from the visionary response. 

God who brings us back into unity with him stems from the sacred response. 



As far as I know, the brain cannot register a deity outside the seven responses. Why not? 
Because God is woven into reality, and the brain knows reality in these limited ways. It may 
sound as though we're reducing the Almighty Father, the Primeval Goddess, and the Mystery 
of Mysteries to a firestorm of electrical activity in the cerebral cortex — but we aren't doing 
that. We are trying to find the basic facts that will make God possible, real, and useful. 

Many people will be sympathetic to this because they long for a God who fits into their 
lives. No one can make God enter the everyday world, however. The real question is whether 
he might be here already and going unnoticed. I keep coming back to the transition zone in 
our "reality sandwich." Unless you are willing to take your vision there, the presence of God 
is too ghostly to be relied upon. Is the brain prepared for such a journey? Absolutely. 

A friend of mine once knew John Lennon very well and continued over the years to grieve 
his passing. She is a gifted singer, and one night recently she had a dream in which he came to 
her and showed her an image from the past when they were together. Waking up, she decided 
to write a new, very intimate song based on her dream, yet in the cold light of day she began 
to have doubts. I came to London for a visit, and she told me about her indecision. 

"After all, it's only a dream, isn't it?" she said. "Maybe I'm foolish to make too much of it." 

At that moment her three-year-old ran into the room and plopped himself onto a chair in 
the corner. He happened to land on the remote control for the television, which came on 
suddenly. On the screen, amazingly, we saw a nostalgia program showing John Lennon and 
my friend smiling at the camera, caught in the exact moment she had witnessed in her dream. 
She burst into tears and got her answer: She would write the song for him. 

I believe that this interaction took place in the transition zone. A message arrived from a 
deeper place than we usually go. To say that it came from spirit or God is totally justified, but 
the brain also played its part, for this incident began with everyday brain processes — thoughts, 
emotions, dreams, doubts — that finally crystallized into inspiration. We see a perfect example 
here of our fifth response, the creative response. 

Can we truly satisfy the demands of objectivity when it comes to God? A physicist would 
recognize our reality sandwich with no difficulty. The material world has long since dissolved 
for the great quantum thinkers. (2) After Einstein made time and space into fluid things that 
merge into each other, the traditional universe couldn't hold up. In the reality sandwich of 
physics there are also three levels: 

Material reality, the world of objects and events 

Quantum reality, a transition zone where energy turns into matter 

Virtual reality, the place beyond time and space, the origin of the universe 


Here we run into a semantic problem, because the phrase virtual reality is no longer used 
the way a physicist would understand it. These words now commonly mean computer- 
simulated reality or even, very loosely, any video game. So I will modify virtual reality and 
call it the virtual domain, and to follow suit, quantum reality will have to become the 
quantum domain. 

It isn't just coincidence that these three layers parallel the religious worldview. The two 
models have to parallel each other, because they are both delineated by the brain. Science and 
religion are not really opposites but just very different ways of trying to decode the universe. 
Both visions contain the material world, which is a given. There has to be an unseen source of 
creation, because the cosmos can be traced back only so far before time and space dissolve. 
And there has to be a place where these two opposites meet. 


I said before that I don't think mystics are set apart from ordinary people. They are just 
better quantum navigators. They journey into the transition zone closer to God, and while we 
might visit there for a few moments of joy, at most a few days, saints and mystics have found 
the secret of remaining there far longer. Instead of wondering about the mystery of life, a saint 
lives it. Yet even without adequate words to convey that experience, we find certain 
similarities from culture to culture: 

1 . The body's heaviness becomes as if weightless. 

2. A sense of floating or looking down from above is felt. 

3. Breathing becomes lighter, rarefied, more even. 

4. Physical pain or discomfort are much lessened. 

5. A sense of energy streams through the body. 

6. Color and sound are heightened; increased sensitivity to all senses. 

A common phrase for this sensation, which one hears over and over, is "going into the 
light." It's a phenomenon not limited to saints. Some or all of these bodily changes occur to 
common people. Existence breaks through its drab routine with a surge of bliss and purity. 
Some mystics describe these moments as timeless. Afterward a psychological afterglow often 
persists, a peaceful certainty that one has "come home." In this transition zone that almost 
reaches God's domain, experience is both inner and outer. 

But what if we could steady our flash of ecstasy and learn to explore this strange new 
territory? Then we would discover the same thing revealed to Dame Julian six hundred years 
ago: "He is our clothing that wraps us and winds us about, embraces us and all-encloses us, 
for love.... Remain in this, and you shall know more of the same... without end." In other 
words, the sacred isn't a feeling, it is a place. The problem is that when you try to journey 
there, material reality keeps pulling you back again. The wondrous moment passes. To remain 
in the transition zone is extremely difficult. 

Let me bring these abstract terms down to earth. Some of the following experiences have 
occurred to all of us: 

In the midst of danger, you feel suddenly cared for and protected. 

You deeply fear a crisis in your personal life, but when it comes, you experience a 

sudden calmness. 

A stranger makes you feel a sudden rush of love. 

An infant or young child looks into your eyes, and for a second you believe that an 

old sold is looking at you. 

In the presence of death, you feel the passing of wings. 

Looking at the sky, you have a sense of infinite space. 

A stunning glimpse of beauty makes you forget for a second who you are. 


Whenever you have any such experiences, your brain has responded in an unusual way; it 
has responded to God. 

If we only knew it, God's most cherished secrets are hidden inside the human skull — 
ecstasy, eternal love, grace, and mystery. This doesn't seem possible at first glance. If you 
take a scalpel to the brain, you will cut into soft gray tissue that doesn't respond to the touch. 



There are lakes of slow-running water in this quivering terrain and open caves where light 
never penetrates. You wouldn't suspect that a soul is hiding here somewhere, that spirit can 
find its home in an organ almost as liquid as red blood cells and as mushy as an unripe 
banana. 

The landscape of the brain is deceptive, however. Every burst of light that has blinded 
every saint in history took place here in the darkness. Every image of God was designed in 
tissue that appears to be a mass of congested nerves. So to find a window to God, you have to 
realize that your brain is layered into regions that are ruled by different impulses. The new 
kingdoms are full of higher thought, poetry, and love, like the New Testament. The old 
kingdoms are more primordial, like parts of the Old Testament. They are ruled by raw 
emotion, instinct, power, and survival. 

In the old kingdoms each of us is a hunter. The ancestral plains of Africa are buried deep 
in your cranium, remembered with all their terror and hunger. Your genes remember leopards 
that leapt out of trees, and in a traffic snarl the old brain wants to hunt that leopard, fighting it 
to the death. Many doubters have said that God was invented so that these ferocious instincts 
can be kept in check. Otherwise our violence would turn on us and kill us. But I don't believe 
this. The oldest hunter lurking in our brains is after bigger prey, God himself. And the motive 
isn't to fight or die but to find our speck of joy and truth that nothing in the world can erase. 
The one thing we cannot survive is chaos. 

We evolved to find God. This is what the lightning storm of the brain's endless activity is 
all about. God for us is not a choice but a necessity. Almost a hundred years ago the great 
psychologist and philosopher William James declared that human nature contains a "will to 
believe" in some higher power. Personally James didn't know if God existed or whether there 
was a world beyond this one. He was almost certain that no proof of God could be found, but 
he felt it would deprive human beings of something profound if belief was stripped away from 
us. We need the hunt. 

God, it turns out, isn't a person; God is a process. Your brain is hardwired to find God. 

Until you do, you will not know who you are. There is a catch, however. Our brains don't lead 
us automatically to spirit. Seeking has always been necessary. Some people feel that God is 
within reach, or at least within stalking range, while others feel he is totally absent. (It is 
curious that 72 percent of respondents in a recent poll said that they believe in heaven while 
only 56 percent believe in hell. This is more than naive optimism; the tendency of life is to 
point us in the right direction.) 

A seeker always hopes to see the one, true, final God who will settle all doubts, but instead 
we hunt for clues. Unable to take in the totality of God, we get hints from the brain, which is 
constantly exercising an amazing ability to insert a glimpse of spirit in the most mundane 
situations. To return to a few of those simple examples I gave: 

In the midst of danger, you feel suddenly cared for and protected. Spirit is being 
revealed through fight or flight. 

You deeply fear a crisis in your personcd life, but when it comes, you experience a 
sudden calmness. Spirit is being revealed through restful awareness. 

A stranger makes you feel a sudden rush of love. Spirit is being revealed through 
the visionary response. 

An infant or young child looks into your eyes, and for a second you believe that an 
old sold is looking at you. Spirit is being revealed through intuition. 

Looking at the sky, you have a sense of infinite space. Spirit is being revealed 
through unity. 



It is typical of modern life to believe that nature is set up to be random and chaotic. This is 
far from true. Life looks meaningless when you have worn out old responses, old realities, 
and an old version of God. To bring God back, we have to follow new, even strange responses 
wherever they lead us. As one spiritual teacher wisely put it, "The material world is infinite, 
but it is a boring infinity. The really interesting infinity lies beyond." 


* A note on gender: Finding a pronoun for God is not easy. In keeping with common tradition, this book uses he. 
But surely God transcends all gender. I could have rotated three different pronouns — he, she, and it — but that 
would not have gotten any nearer to the truth, and it would have made for very clumsy reading. 


GETTING WHAT YOU WANT 

The Seven Levels of Fulfillment 

God is another name for infinite intelligence. To achieve anything in life, a piece of this 
intelligence must be contacted and used. In other words, God is always there for you. The 
seven responses of the human brain are avenues to attain some aspect of God. Each level of 
fulfillment proves God's reality at that level. 


Level 1 (Fight-or-Flight Response) 

You fulfill your life through family, community, a sense of belonging, and material 
comforts. 

Level 2 (Reactive Response) 

You fulfill your life through success, power, influence, status, and other ego 
satisfactions. 

Level 3 (Restful Awareness Response) 

You fulfill your life through peace, centeredness, selfacceptance, and inner silence. 
Level 4 (Intuitive Response) 

You fulfill your life through insight, empathy, tolerance, and forgiveness. 

Level 5 (Creative Response) 

You fulfill your life through inspiration, expanded creativity in art or science, and 
unlimited discovery. 

Level 6 (Visionary Response) 

You fulfill your life through reverence, compassion, devoted service, and universal 
love. 

Level 7 (Sacred Response) 

You fulfill your life through wholeness and unity with the divine. 


It is very important to absorb this notion that spirit involves a constant process. It isn't a 
feeling, nor is it a thing you can hold and measure. In the unfolding of spirit many mysteries 



begin to make sense. For instance, consider this famous sentence from the Vedas: "Those who 
know It speak of It not, those who speak of It know It not." The mystery here is tied up in the 
word It. If It means some kind of revelation, then you may struggle all your life to join the 
elite who have had It revealed to them. Enlightenment turns into something like a secret 
handshake. But if It means a real place that one can journey to, there is no need for frustration. 
You just find that place, without pointless words. "Don’t talk about it, go!" seems like sensible 
advice. 

A striking example that there is a reachable place beyond material reality is prayer. 
Beginning more than twenty years ago, researchers devised experiments to try to verify 
whether prayer had any efficacy. Seriously ill patients in hospitals were divided into groups, 
some being prayed for while others were not. In all cases best medical care was still given, yet 
it became evident that the prayed-for group seemed to recover better. This result was all the 
more astonishing when it was discovered that the person doing the praying didn't have to 
know the patient personally, or even know their names. But only in 1998 did a Duke 
University team verify to all skeptics that prayer indeed has such power. (3} The researchers 
took into account all manner of variables, including heart rate, blood pressure, and clinical 
outcomes; 150 patients who had undergone invasive cardiac procedures were studied, but 
none of them knew that they were being prayed for. Seven religious groups around the world 
were asked to pray. These included Buddhists in Nepal, Carmelite nuns in Baltimore, and 
Virtual Jerusalem, an organization that grants E-mail requests for prayers to be written down 
and inserted into the Wailing Wall. Researchers found that surgical patients' recovery could 
be from 50 to 100 percent better if someone prayed for them. 

Even before these "highly intriguing" results, as researchers called them, the phenomenon 
of prayer had already gained sudden new popularity, yet the essential point is often missed. 
Prayer is a journey in consciousness — it takes you to a place different from ordinary thought. 
In this place the patient is not a stranger, nor is she removed in space. You and she are joined 
in a place where the boundaries of the body no longer count. Your intention to make her well 
has an effect across the space-time boundary. In other words, prayer is a quantum event 
carried out in the brain. 

Of all the clues God left for us to find, the greatest is the light, the Shekhinah. From that 
clue we can unfold a true picture of the deity. This is a bold claim, but it is corroborated by 
the fact that science — our most credible modem religion — also traces creation back to light. 
(4) In this century Einstein and the other pioneers of quantum physics broke through the 
barrier of material reality to a new world, and in their awe most had a mystical experience. 
They sensed that when light gave up its mysteries, God's light would be known. 

Our vision can't help but be organized around light. The same brain responses that enable 
you to see a tree as a tree, instead of as a ghostly swarm of buzzing atoms, also enable you to 
experience God. They reach far beyond organized religion. But we can take any passage from 
world scripture and decode it through the brain. It is the mechanism that makes the scripture 
real to us. Our brains respond on the same seven levels that apply to our experience: 

1 . A level of danger, threat, and survival. 

2. A level of striving, competition, and power. 

3. A level of peace, calm, and reflection. 

4. A level of insight, understanding, and forgiveness. 

5. A level of aspiration, creativity, and discovery. 

6. A level of reverence, compassion, and love. 

7. A level of unbounded unity. 


Every Bible story teaches something at one or more of these levels (as do all world 
scriptures), and in every instance the teaching is attributed to God. Your brain and the deity 
are thus fused in order for the world to make sense. To repeat, the one thing you cannot 
survive is chaos. 

If you believe in a punishing, vengeful God — clearly related to fight or flight — you won't 
see the reality of the Buddha's teaching of Nirvana. If you believe in the God of love 
envisioned by Jesus — rooted in the visionary response — you will not see the reality of the 
Greek myth wherein Saturn, primal father of the gods, ate all his children. Every version of 
God is part mask, part reality. The infinite can only reveal a portion of itself at any one time. 
Indeed, we would have all grown up, in the West at least, calling God "It" except for the 
linguistic anomaly that Hebrew has no neuter pronoun. In Sanskrit, the ancient Indians had no 
such problem and referred to the infinite deity as both It and That. 

The most startling conclusion of our new model is that God is as we are. The whole 
universe is as we are, because without the human mind, there would be only quantum soup, 
billions of random sensory impressions. Yet thanks to the mind/brain, we recognize that 
encoded into the swirling cosmos are the most valued things in existence: form, meaning, 
beauty, truth, love. These are the realities the brain is reaching for when it reaches for God. 

He is as real as they are, but just as elusive. 


The Seven Levels of Miracles 

A miracle is a display of power from beyond the five senses. Although all miracles take place 
in the transition zone, they differ from level to level. In general, miracles become more 
"supernatural" after the fourth or fifth brain response, but any miracle involves direct contact 
with spirit. 


Level 1 (Fight-or-Flight Response) 

Miracles involve surviving great danger, impossible rescues, a sense of divine 
protection. 

Example: A mother who runs into a burning house to rescue her child, or lifts a car 
with a child trapped underneath 

Level 2 (Reactive Response) 

Miracles involve incredible achievements and success, control over the body or 
mind. 

Example: Extreme feats of martial arts, child prodigies with inexplicable gifts in 
music or mathematics, the rise of a Napoleon from humble beginnings to immense 
power (men of destiny) 

Level 3 (Restful Awareness Response) 

Miracles involve synchronicity, yogic powers, premonitions, feeling the presence 
of God or angels. 

Example: Yogis who can change body temperature or heart rate at will, being 
visited by someone from far away who has just died, visitation by a guardian angel 

Level 4 (Intuitive Response) 

Miracles involve telepathy, ESP, knowledge of past or future lifetimes, prophetic 
powers. 

Example: Reading someone else's thoughts or aura, psychic predictions, astral 
projection to other locations 

Level 5 (Creative Response) 



Miracles involve divine inspiration, artistic genius, spontaneous fulfillment of 
desires (wishes come true). 

Example: The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, having a thought that suddenly 
manifests, Einstein's insights into time and relativity 

Level 6 (Visionary Response) 

Miracles involve healing, physical transformations, holy apparitions, highest degree 
of supernatural feats. 

Example: Walking on water, healing incurable diseases through touch, direct 
revelation from the Virgin Mary 

Level 7 (Sacred Response) 

Miracles involve inner evidence of enlightenment. 

Example: Lives of the great prophets and teachers — Buddha, Jesus, Lao-Tze 

I am not imagining that every skeptic and atheist reading this book has suddenly jumped to 
his feet proclaiming that God is real. This will have to go by stages. But at least now we have 
something to hold on to, and it is something extremely useful. We can explain those 
mysterious journeys that mystics have taken into God's reality. Such journeys have always 
deeply moved me, and I remember exactly where my fascination began. The first such 
voyager 1 ever heard of was called the Colonel — his story is one of the seeds of this book. As 
I retell it, 1 can feel my mind experiencing his reality, which passed through so many phases 
from danger to compassion, from peace to unity. He will serve as a promise of the unfolding 
truth that is possible in any of our lives: 

I was ten and my father, a doctor in the Indian army, had moved his family to Assam. No 
part of the country is as green and idyllic. Assam is an Eden, if Eden were covered with tea 
plantations as far as the eye can see. I could literally hear a song in my heart as I walked to the 
high-perched school on the hill. It must have been the magic of the place that made me notice 
an old beggar who used to sit by the road. He was always there under his tree, dressed in 
tatters, rarely moving or saying a word. The village women believed absolutely that this 
unkempt figure was a saint. They would sit beside him for hours, praying for a healing (or a 
new baby), and my grandmother assured me that our neighbor lady had been cured of arthritis 
by walking past him and silently asking for his blessing. 

Strangely, everyone called this old beggar "the Colonel." One day I couldn't control my 
curiosity and asked why, and my best friend from school, Oppo, found out for me. Oppo's 
mother had once been healed by the Colonel, and Oppo's father, who was a newspaper 
reporter in town, had a remarkable tale to tell me: 

At the end of World War II, a large force of British troops, the doomed "forgotten army," 
had been pinned down or captured by the invading Japanese in Burma. Because of the 
unending monsoon rains, the fighting had been tough and miserable; the treatment received 
by the prisoners of war was atrocious. Indians served in the British army, and one of them was 
a Bengali doctor named Sengupta. 

Sengupta was on the verge of starving in a POW camp when the Japanese decided to 
retreat from their position. He didn’t know if the British army had somehow advanced close 
by, but it didn't matter. Instead of marching the POWs to a new prison, their captors lined 
them up and shot each one in the head at close range with a pistol. This included Sengupta, 
who was in some way grateful to die and end his torment. He heard the gun blast at his 
temple, and with a jolt of searing pain he fell over. Only this wasn't the end. By some miracle 
he regained consciousness several hours later — he judged the passage of time because night 
had fallen and the prison camp was dead quiet. 

It took some moments before Sengupta, who felt that he was suffocating, realized with 
horror that he had come to under a heavy pile of corpses. In the rush to abandon camp, no one 



had checked to see if he was really dead, and his limp body had been thrown onto the pile 
with the others. It seemed like an eternity before Sengupta gathered enough strength to crawl 
out into the open air; he staggered to the river and washed himself, trembling with fear and 
revulsion. It was obvious that he was alone and that no Allies were coming to rescue him. 

By morning he had made the decision to walk to safety. Deep in a war zone with no sense 
of Burmese geography, he could only think to return to India — and that is what he did. 
Surviving on fruit, insects, and rain water, he traveled by night and hid in the jungle by day. 
The terrain consisted of hill after hill, and the ground was deep in mud. Although he passed 
occasional villages and peasant farms, he didn't dare trust anyone enough to ask for refuge. 

He could hear unknown wild animals in the dark at a time when tigers were still found in 
Burma, and he stumbled over snakes that terrified him. 

Sengupta's trek took months before he stepped across the border into Bengal, and 
eventually the emaciated hero walked into Calcutta, heading for British army headquarters. 

He made his report and recounted his achievement, but the British, far from believing him, 
immediately had him arrested. He was put in irons as a probable Japanese spy or collaborator. 
Broken emotionally as well as physically, he lay in his dark cell and contemplated the fate 
that had taken him from one prison to another. 

Somewhere during this period of disgrace, under daily interrogation and a later court- 
martial, Sengupta went through a supreme transformation. It wasn’t something he ever spoke 
about, but the change was startling — in place of bitterness he gained complete peace, he 
healed his wounds both inner and outer (fitting for someone who would turn into a healer of 
others) and he stopped struggling, waiting calmly for the inevitable sentence of the court. 
Amazingly the inevitable never came. In a sudden change of heart the British chose to believe 
that his story was true, prompted by the immediate end of hostilities when the Americans 
dropped the atomic bomb on Japan. 

Within a week Sengupta was dragged out of prison, awarded a medal for valor, and 
paraded through the streets of Calcutta as a hero. He seemed as strangely oblivious of the 
cheers as he had been of the suffering. Leaving medicine behind, he became a wandering 
monk. When he finally grew old and found his resting place under the tree in Assam, he didn't 
tell anyone his story. It was the locals who dubbed him the Colonel, perhaps tipped off by 
Oppo's father, the newspaper reporter. 

Naturally my first, burning question at the age of ten was how a man could be shot in the 
head with a pistol at point-blank range and survive. Oppo's father shrugged. When they were 
captured, most of the British soldiers were armed with ammunition made in India. The 
Japanese executed them with their own pistols, and no doubt one of the bullets had been 
defective, filled with powder but no shot. Anyway, that was the best rational guess. So much 
for the miracle. 

Today I ask another question that means more to me: How does such extreme torment, 
which provides every reason to abandon faith, turn into absolute faith instead? No one could 
doubt that the Colonel had arrived at some kind of saintliness from his ordeal. He made the 
mystic journey; he hunted God to the finish. I now realize what a profound miracle the human 
brain actually is. It has the capacity to see spiritual reality under any circumstance. In 
Sengupta's case, consider what he might have been overwhelmed by: the terror of death, the 
possibility of being here one day and gone the next, the fear that good will never prevail over 
evil, and the fragile freedom that could be extinguished by cruel authority. 

It is clear, despite the turmoil that makes belief in God harder than ever, that every level of 
revelation still exists. Redemption is just another word for calling on your innate ability to see 
with the eye of the soul. Two voices are heard in our heads every day, the one believing in the 
dark and the other in the light. Only one reality can be really real. Our new model, the "reality 
sandwich," solves this riddle. Sengupta took a journey into the transition zone where 



transformation occurs. Here, where the material world transforms from dense matter into 
invisible energy; the mind gets transformed as well. 

Sengupta's soul journey passed through fight or flight, restful awareness, intuition, and 
vision, eventually finding the courage to live entirely in the visionary response for the rest of 
his life. He ensconced himself in a new way, clothed in love and serenity. The brain 
discovered that it could escape the prison of its old reactions, rising to a new, higher level that 
it perceived as God. 

So now we have the outline for the entire spiritual journey in our hands: the unfolding of 
God is a process made possible by the brain's ability to unfold its own potential. Inherent in 
each of us is wonder, love, transformation, and miracles, not just because we crave these 
things but because they are our birthright. Our neurons have evolved to make these higher 
aspirations real. From the womb of the brain springs a new and useful God. Or to be precise, 
seven variations of God (5) which leave a trail of clues for us to follow every day. 

If asked why we should strive to know God, my answer would be selfish: I want to be a 
creator. This is the ultimate promise of spirituality, that you can become the author of your 
own existence, the maker of personal destiny. Your brain is already performing this service 
for you unconsciously. In the quantum domain your brain chooses the response that is 
appropriate at any given moment. The universe is an overwhelming chaos. It must be 
interpreted to make sense; it must be decoded. The brain therefore can't take reality as it is 
given; one of the seven responses has to be selected, and the quantum realm is where this 
decision is made. 

To know God, you must consciously participate in making this journey — that is the 
purpose of free will. On the surface of life we make much more trivial choices but pretend 
that they carry enormous weight. In reality, you are constantly acting out seven fundamental 
choices about the kind of world you recognize: 

1 . The choice of fear if you want to struggle and barely survive. 

2. The choice of power if you want to compete and achieve. 

3. The choice of inner reflection if you want peace. 

4. The choice to know yourself if you want insight. 

5. The choice to create if you want to discover the workings of nature. 

6. The choice to love if you want to heal others and yourself. 

7. The choice to be if you want to appreciate the infinite scope of God's creation. 

I am not arranging these from bad to good, better to best. You are capable of all these 
choices; they are hardwired into you. But for many people, only the first few responses have 
been activated. Some part of their brains is dormant, and therefore their view of spirit is 
extremely limited. It is no wonder that finding God is called awakening. A fully awakened 
brain is the secret to knowing God. In the end, however, the seventh stage is the goal, the one 
where pure being allows us to revel in the infinite creation of God. Here the mystic Jews 
searching for the Shekhinah (6) meet the Buddhists in their search for satori, and when they 
arrive, the ancient Vedic seers will be waiting in the presence of Shiva, along with Christ and 
his Father. This is the place which is both the beginning and end of a process that is God. In 
this process things like spirit, soul, power, and love unfold in a completely new way. Here 
certainty can replace doubt, and as the inspired French writer Simone Weil once wrote about 
the spiritual quest, "Only certainty will do. Anything less than certainty is unworthy of God." 


Two 


MYSTERY OF MYSTERIES 


This is the work of the soul that most pleases God. 
—THE CLOUD OF UNKNOWING 


The mystery of God wouldn't exist if the world wasn't also a mystery. Some scientists believe 
we are closer than ever to a "Theory of Everything," or TOE, as the physicists dub it. TOE 
will explain the beginning of the universe and the end of time, the first and last breaths of 
cosmic existence. From quarks to quasars, all will be revealed, as the old melodramas used to 
promise. Is there a place for God in this "everything," or does the Creator get booted out of 
his own creation? His fate may be important, but when it is wrapped up with ours, it becomes 
all-important. 

Consider again the reality sandwich that has served as our model. As we saw before, it 
comes in three layers: 


Material reality 

QUANTUM DOMAIN 

Virtual domain 

Anyone could be forgiven for thinking that God is nowhere to be found here, in fact that 
all the wonders of the sacred world will become mundane on the day that the TOE explains it 
all away. 

For centuries humans looked in the mirror of Nature and saw heroes, wizards, dragons, and 
holy grails reflected back. The sacred was real, a source of supreme power, and nothing could 
exist, from a river to a thunderclap, without a god to cause it. Today the mirror has clouded. 
We have outgrown the need for a thunder god or a hero born on Olympus. What do we see 
instead? A society that strip-mines old myths to build a city like Las Vegas. If you want to 
meet myth here, you check into a hotel-casino called Excalibur. The only god is Fortune, the 
only dragons to conquer are the slot machines, and most of the time they win. 

If it is true, as the poetic sentiment goes, that "One touch of Nature makes the whole world 
kin," then one touch of myth makes the whole world sacred. In a mythless world, something 
is missing, but do we know what it is? There are many clues to that answer, scattered around 
in the sacred sites of the world. No one can stand before the Great Pyramid of Cheops (or 
Khufu, to give him his proper Egyptian name) without feeling the presence of a power that is 
absent even in the hugest skyscraper. The pharaoh once entombed in the depths of this 
massive structure was a mortal, but he aspired to be immortal, and he fed that aspiration by 
erecting the largest single mass of stone ever piled in one place, even to this day. He also 
backed up his ambition with God. Khufu was venerated as a descendant of the gods and was 



therefore a god-man himself. Is this a demonstration that the ego of a king knows no bounds? 
Certainly. But there is more here. 

Khufu's link to the gods linked his people at the same time. From time immemorial 
humans have worried over the same questions: Do I have a soul? What happens after I die? Is 
there an afterlife, and will I meet God when I get there? The Great Pyramid was an answer 
erected in stone. You can almost hear the stones crying out, "Now tell me I'm not immortal!" 

For a harsh contrast, go back to Las Vegas. What do we see there? Wealth and ambition to 
rival the pharaohs, but are the people who cram into these pleasure domes any more secure 
about the great questions? Or does a world without spiritual power force us to seek distraction 
because underneath, we do not know the answers at all? 

The family of man is bound up in the sacred. We cannot allow it to die without strangling 
our blood ties to a deeper reality: that we all come from one place, that we are on a journey 
toward a greater good, that our every act is being weighed from a cosmic perspective. 

Ordinary reality is trivial compared to this heritage. The Theory of Everything will be useless, 
if not destructive, unless we can use it to keep the sacred alive. 

Fortunately, the most solid, reliable things in existence — a seashell, a tree branch, a 
pothole in the middle of the road — partake of God's mystery. If you believe in a rock, you are 
automatically believing in God. Let me explain. 

Ordinary reality is only the top layer of our sandwich. The material world is full of familiar 
objects that we can see, feel, touch, taste, and smell. As big objects become very small, 
shrinking to the size of atoms, our senses fail us. Theoretically the shrinkage has to stop 
somewhere, because no atom is smaller than hydrogen, the first material particle to be born 
out of the Big Bang. But in fact an amazing transformation happens beyond the atom — 
everything solid disappears. Atoms are composed of vibrating energy packets that have no 
solidity at all, no mass or size, nothing for the senses to see or touch. The Latin word for a 
packet or package is quantum, the word chosen to describe one unit of energy inside the atom, 
and, as it turned out, a new level of reality. 

At the quantum level nothing of the material world is left intact. It is strange enough to 
hold up your hand and realize that it is actually, at a deeper level, invisible vibrations taking 
place in a void. Even at the atomic level all objects are revealed as 99.9999 percent empty 
space. On its own scale, the distance between a whirling electron and the nucleus it revolves 
around is wider than the distance between the earth and the sun. But you could never capture 
that electron anyway, since it too breaks down into energy vibrations that wink in and out of 
existence millions of times per second. Therefore the whole universe is a quantum mirage, 
winking in and out of existence millions of times per second. At the quantum level the whole 
cosmos is like a blinking light. There are no stars or galaxies, only vibrating energy fields that 
our senses are too dull and slow to pick up given the incredible speed at which light and 
electricity move. 

In the animal kingdom some nervous systems are much faster than ours and others much 
slower. A snail's neurons pick up signals from the outside world so slowly, for example, that 
events any faster than three seconds would not be perceived. In other words, if a snail was 
looking at an apple, and I quickly reached in and snatched it away, the snail would not be able 
to detect my hand. It would "see" the apple disappear before its very eyes. In the same way, 
quantum flashes are millions of times too rapid for us to register, so our brains play a trick on 
us by "seeing" solid objects that are continuous in time and space, the same way that a movie 
seems continuous. A movie consists of twenty-four still pictures flashing by per second, with 
twenty- four gaps of blackness as each frame is taken away and a new one put in its place. But 
since our brains cannot perceive forty-eight stop-motion events in one second, the illusion of 
the movie is created. 



Now speed this up by many powers of ten and you get the trick of the movie we call real 
life. You and I exist as flashing photons with a black void in between each flash — the 
quantum light show comprises our whole body, our every thought and wish, and every event 
we take part in. In other words, we are being created, over and over again, all the time. 

Genesis is now and always has been. Who is behind this never-ending creation? Whose power 
of mind or vision is capable of taking the universe away and putting it back again in a fraction 
of a second? 

The power of creation — whatever it turns out to be — lies even beyond energy, a force with 
the ability to turn gaseous clouds of dust into stars and eventually into DNA. In the 
terminology of physics, we refer to this pre-quantum level as virtual. When you go beyond all 
energy, there is nothing, a void. Visible light becomes virtual light; real space becomes virtual 
space; real time becomes virtual time. In the process, all properties vanish. Light no longer 
shines, space covers no distance, time is eternal. This is the womb of creation, infinitely 
dynamic and alive. Words like empty, dark, and cold do not apply to it. The virtual domain is 
so inconceivable that only religious language seems to touch it at all. Today in India a devout 
believer may greet the dawn with an ancient Vedic hymn: 

In the beginning, 

There was neither existence nor nonexistence, 

All this world was unmanifest energy... 

The One breathed, without breath, by Its own power 

Nothing else was there.... 

RIG-VEDA 

In modern terms, this verse tells us that God can only be found in a virtual state, where all 
energy is stored before creation. Physics has struggled hard with this state that comes before 
time and space, and so has popular imagination. It may surprise many to learn that the 
familiar image of God as a patriarch in a white robe seated on his throne has little authority, 
even in Judaic scripture. The image appears only once, in the Book of Daniel, whereas we are 
told many times in the books of Moses that God is without human form. 

The best working theory about creation reads as follows: Before the Big Bang space was 
unbounded, expanded like an accordion into infinite pleats or dimensions, while time existed 
in seed form, an eternal presence without events and therefore needing no past, present, or 
future. This state was utterly void in one sense and utterly full in another. It contained nothing 
we could possibly perceive, yet the potential for everything resided here. As the Vedic seers 
declared, neither existence nor nonexistence could be found, since those terms apply only to 
things that have a beginning, middle, and end. Physicists often refer to this state as a 
singularity: space, time, and the entire material universe were once contained in a point. A 
singularity is conceived as the smallest dot you can imagine, and therefore not a dot at all. 

Now if you can imagine that the cosmos exploded into being in a dazzling flash of light 
from this one point, you must then go a step further. Because the pre-creation state has no 
time, it is still here. The Big Bang has never happened in the virtual domain, and yet 
paradoxically all Big Bangs have happened — no matter how many times the universe expands 
across billions of light-years, only to collapse back onto itself and withdraw back into the 
void, nothing will change at the virtual level. This is as close as physics has come to the 
religious notion of a God who is omnipresent, omniscient, and omnipotent. Omni means all, 
and the virtual state, since it has no boundaries of any kind, is properly called the All. 

It isn't surprising that we find it so difficult to speak about the All. In India seers often 
referred to it simply as That, or tat in Sanskrit. At the moment of enlightenment, a person is 
able to go past the five senses to perceive the only truth that can be uttered: "I am That, You 



are That, and all this is That." The meaning isn't a riddle; it simply states that behind the veil 
of creation, the pre-creation state still exists, enclosing everything. 

A physicist friend once stated the same truth in newer words: "You must realize, Deepak, 
that time is just a cosmic convenience that keeps everything from happening all at once. This 
convenience is needed at the material level, but not at deeper levels. Therefore if you could 
see yourself in your virtual state, all the chaos and swirling galaxies would make perfect 
sense. They form one pattern unfolding in perfect symmetry. Viewed from this perspective, 
the end point of all creation is now. The whole cosmos has conspired to create you and me 
sitting here this very second." 

Nothing is more fascinating than to watch science blurring its edges into spirit. There are 
no easier words for the transition zone than "quantum" and no easier words for God than 
"virtual." To track down a miracle, one must go into these domains. Miracles indicate that 
reality doesn't begin and end at the material level. "How do I find God?" a young disciple 
once asked a famous guru in India. (1) "I can't see any evidence that He is anywhere around 
us, and millions of people live very well without him." 

"Everything without God happens in space and time. This is the world you are used to," his 
guru replied. "Space and time are like a net that has trapped you, but nets always have holes. 
Find such a hole and jump through it. Then God will be obvious." Every religious tradition 
contains such loopholes, escape routes into a world beyond ours. In the Gospel of Thomas, 
Jesus says that his role in life is to point the disciples away from the rule of the five senses, 
which are totally confined to space-time: (2) 

I shall give you what no eye has seen and what no ear has heard and what no hand has 

touched and what has never occurred to the human mind. 

This promise was certainly carried out whenever Jesus performed any one of his thirty or 
so miracles, but it is fascinating to observe that often they were performed with considerable 
reluctance, as if they were somehow beside the point. The real point was to see that our senses 
aren't trustworthy at all. The incurable leper only appears that way, the few loaves and fishes 
are only an illusion, the storm on the Sea of Galilee can be calmed by a mere act of will. After 
healing the leper with his touch, Jesus sounds particularly impatient with anyone overawed by 
what he has done. 

Then Jesus dismissed him with this stem warning: "Be sure you say nothing to 

anybody. Go and show yourself to the priest, and make the offering laid down by 

Moses for your cleansing; that will certify the cure." 

Naturally the miraculously healed man couldn't help himself and told everyone he ran into. 
Word spread, until Jesus couldn't stay in the town because of the uproar. Teeming crowds 
wanted their own miracle; he fled to the countryside, where they continued to pursue him. 
Would we also be so overawed as to miss the larger point? I think so. In India today there is a 
well-known woman saint who reputedly cured a leper by touching his sores. I remember 
reading too about a gum who used to let anyone into his house on feast days, holding the laws 
of hospitality to be sacred. He was not rich, and his followers were distressed that hundreds of 
guests would appear at his door to be fed. The gum only smiled and made a strange request. 
"Keep feeding everyone from those buckets of rice and lentils," he said, "but first cover them 
with a cloth." The buckets were covered so that no one could see into them, and as many 
times as the ladles were dipped in, there was always more food to go around. In this way the 
guru performed the same miracle as Jesus. 


It is easy to be awed by such stories, but is it helpful when we seek to know facts? From 
our awe a wealth of superstition, fable, and often false hope has developed. Yet in the blurring 
of the quantum and the miraculous, a single reality is beginning to emerge. Stephen Hawking 
indicated in his A Brief History of Time that if the laws of nature were deeply explored, we 
would one day know the mind of God. (3} Here he echoed a famous remark by Einstein: "I 
want to know how God thinks, everything else is a detail." Because he was a rare visionary, I 
hope that Einstein would accept as a start the following map of how God thinks: 

Virtual domain = the field of spirit 
Quantum domain = the field of mind 
Material reality = the field of physical existence 

If you feel secure with these terms, you can clear up mystery after mystery — literally all 
the paradoxes of religion start to unravel, and God's ways make sense for the first time. Let 
me give an example from the field of healing: 

Some decades ago an Italian army officer was taken on a stretcher to the shrine of Lourdes. 
He was suffering from bone cancer in its most advanced metastasized stage. One hip joint was 
so ravaged that it had all but dissolved, and his leg was kept attached only by a splint. The 
officer had no desperate expectations of a cure, but he took the holy waters, along with 
thousands of other pilgrims who flock to this site. Over the next few months a careful X-ray 
record was kept as his cancer was miraculously healed. This did not just entail the malignancy 
disappearing: His entire hip joint regrew. Medical science has no explanation for such a thing, 
and the Italian military officer became one of the authenticated healings attributed to the 
Virgin Mary at Lourdes. (I believe around seventy of these have been verified since such 
claims have been examined by a panel of doctors adhering to the strictest standards of proof.) 

If we refer to our model, this healing involves a unique event: All three levels of reality 
were in communication. The soldier's body and his cancer were on the material level. His 
prayers were on the quantum level. God's intervention came from the virtual level. In one 
sense this seems to make a miracle seem very cold-blooded and clinical. But in another sense 
it makes everything a miracle. And why shouldn't that be so? The fact is that stars, mountains, 
monarch butterflies, and a single skin cell all depend on the same open lines of 
communication. The flow of reality is miraculous because invisible emptiness gets 
transformed into the brilliant orange of a butterfly's wing or the massive solidity of a 
mountain without any effort at all. 

This unseen power is sacred and mythic but present all the time. Science is guilty of trying 
to explain it away instead of explaining it. A real Theory of Everything would instruct us in 
the art of living on all three levels of reality with equal power and security. Saints strive to get 
to that point; it is the true meaning of enlightenment. 

This is all to say that God's mystery is the same as the mystery of the world. The promise 
made by Jesus, to show what no human mind has ever conceived, has been fulfilled during 
our lifetime. Indeed, Niels Bohr, the great Danish physicist, stated that quantum physics is not 
only stranger than we think, it is stranger than we can think. We are brought face-to-face with 
one of the mystic's primary beliefs: Whatever can be thought of has already been created by 
God and is real somewhere, if not in this world, then in another. 

Religious trappings offend many rigorous scientists, but do we have to have any? I 
remember as a young doctor reading about a patient suffering from terminal cancer who was 
cured literally by an injection of saline, ordinary salt water. He had entered the hospital, his 
body completely disfigured by swollen malignant lymph nodes. This was in the fifties when 
medicine was riding a crest of optimism about finding a cure for cancer very quickly. Patients 


were routinely killed or nearly killed with doses of mustard gas, the same poison used on 
soldiers in the trenches in World War I but also the first crude chemotherapy. 

This man was desperate to be given the latest wonder treatment, known as Krebiozen. His 
doctor despaired of wasting the drug on someone who would probably be dead before the 
week was out. But out of pity he arranged for a single dose of Krebiozen and injected it on a 
Friday. He left over the weekend, fully expecting never to see his charge again, but on his 
return Monday morning, the patient was jubilant. Every trace of cancer had vanished; his 
lymph nodes had returned to normal, and he felt completely well. Stunned, his doctor released 
him as cured, knowing full well that a single dose of Krebiozen could not possibly have made 
a difference over a few days. 

But the story becomes, if anything, much stranger. After some time had passed, the patient 
read in the newspaper that testing on Krebiozen had proved ineffective. Within a matter of 
days his cancer returned, and once again he entered the hospital in a terminal state. His doctor 
had nothing to give him, so he resorted to the most drastic of placebos. He told the man that 
he would be injected with "new, improved" Krebiozen, while in reality giving him nothing 
but saline solution. 

Again the man was healed in a matter of days. For the second time, he left without 
evidence of cancer in his body. The story doesn't have a happy ending, because when he later 
discovered that all hope for Krebiozen was abandoned, he contracted lymph cancer for the 
third time, and this time he died rapidly. 

But the essence of the story is that spirit acts by flowing from the virtual to the quantum to 
the material level. This is what all miracles have in common, whether they occur with 
religious trappings or not. The crucial importance of religion is not to be discarded, however. 
Faith in God is a way of opening the lines of communication beyond the material. So is prayer 
or hope. The mind cannot do it simply by thinking. If there is ever going to be a science of 
miracles, it begins with intangibles that are rooted in spirit. 

We are only partway toward solving the mystery. Once again I gaze upon the Great 
Pyramid of Cheops; only this time I don't see an awesome pile of sandstone but an idea — 
several ideas, actually. The first is sheer spiritual audacity. This pyramid was once entirely 
sheathed in a layer of white limestone, because its builders wanted to out-dazzle the sun. That 
was the whole point, in fact. Without equality to the sun god, these audacious ancients would 
just have been glorified worker ants. This is a reminder that human beings aspire to be more 
than human. 

The other idea behind the pyramid is wonder. Sacred sites tell us that we are wondrous 
creatures who should be doing wondrous works. And you can still see that here, for it would 
be more than four thousand years before another structure encompassed such a volume of 
space, and that happened on a flat sandbar on the east coast of Florida. 

The Vertical Assembly Building at the Kennedy Space Center is tall enough to hold a 
Saturn V moon rocket upright and has proportions boggling the mind. Standing as it does on a 
featureless landscape, you think you are close to it when you still have a mile to go. But it 
isn't just the scale of the thing that awes us. This building is also an idea, the idea that we will 
find our origins and our cosmic family. The Greek gods were once our family, along with the 
Indian gods and Jehovah of the Book of Genesis. All were cosmic beings, and we traced our 
origins back to the beginning of the cosmos. 

Now the giant rockets blast off; one will soon go to gather interstellar dust, on the off 
chance that it will contain even one microorganism. If a single bacterium comes back from 
deep space, we will have found our own cosmic seed. It's not a whole family, but it's a 
beginning. As the old myths wear out, new ones spring up in our souls. Prometheus brought 
us fire, and now these rockets are the fire we send back to the gods. We are returning the gift 
and also reaching out. We crave to know that we are sacred once again. Are we? The answer 



isn't in the galactic dust but in ourselves. The deepest levels of the quantum domain are the 
common ground where our hands reach out to touch God. When that happens, there is a 
double wonder: What we touch is divine, but it is also ourselves. 

Before we proceed any further, I want to offer three lists that summarize where we are. 
These don’t need to be memorized or studied; everything contained in them will be discussed 
in clear, simple language as we move ahead. But this seems like a good place to pause and 
reflect. Without using religious terminology, we have discovered a great many facts about 
God. They are strange facts perhaps, not easily translated into ordinary life. There is no doubt, 
though, that from these seeds a complete vision of God will blossom. 

VIRTUAL DOMAIN = SPIRIT 

No energy 
No time 

Unbounded — every point in space is every other point 

Wholeness exists at every point 

Infinite silence 

Infinite dynamism 

Infinitely correlated 

Infinite organizing power 

Infinite creative potential 

Eternal 

Unmeasurable 

Immortal, beyond birth and death 
Acausal 


QUANTUM DOMAIN = MIND 


Creation manifests. 

Energy exists. 

Time begins. 

Space expands from its source. 

Events are uncertain. 

Waves and particles alternate with one another. 

Only probabilities can be measured. 

Cause and effect are fluid. 

Birth and death occur at the speed of light. 

Information is embedded in energy. 

MATERIAL REALITY = VISIBLE UNIVERSE 


Events are definite. 

Objects have firm boundaries. 
Matter dominates over energy. 
Three-dimensional 
Knowable by the five senses 
Time flows in a straight line. 
Changeable 
Subject to decay 
Organisms are born and die. 



Predictable 

Cause and effect are fixed. 


Three 

SEVEN STAGES OF GOD 


If you don 't make yourself equal to God, you can 't perceive God. 
—ANONYMOUS CHRISTIAN HERETIC, 

THIRD CENTURY 


Each person is entitled to some version of God that seems real, yet many versions contradict 
one another. On a long trip to India a few years ago, we had stopped the car to look at a 
family of Himalayan monkeys playing by the side of the road. Thirty seconds after we got 
out, a whole band of monkeys, maybe a hundred strong, descended upon us. While everyone 
was snapping photos and throwing bits of fruit and bread, I noticed not far away an old village 
woman all by herself, kneeling before a makeshift shrine under a tree. She was praying to 
Hanuman, a god in the shape of a monkey. I realized then that this pack hung around to grab 
food from the altar and any handouts they could charm from tourists like us. 

What is the difference, I thought, between these chattering, clever animals, who knew all 
the tricks to catch our attention, and a god? Hanuman, who could fly and was known as "son 
of the wind," once journeyed to these same Himalayas. When Prince Rama's brother lay dying 
from a grievous wound received in battle, the flying monkey-king was sent to bring back the 
one special herb that would save his life. Hanuman looked everywhere but couldn’t find the 
herb, so in frustration he ripped up the whole mountain where the plant grew and sped it back 
to lay it at Rama's feet. 

The old woman kneeling at the rickety shrine certainly knew this story from childhood, but 
why would she worship a monkey, even a mythic flying one, and even a king? Her face was 
as devout as anyone praying to the queen of heaven or the son of God. Was her prayer going 
astray because of whom she prayed to? Was it going anywhere at all? 



We are now ready to answer the simplest but most profound question: Who is God? He 
cannot just be impersonal — a principle or a level of reality or a field. We went into the 
quantum and virtual domains to establish a basis for the sacred, yet that was only the 
beginning. In all religions God is described as infinite and unbounded, which creates a huge 
problem. An infinite God is nowhere and everywhere at the same time. He transcends nature, 
and therefore you cannot find him. As we said at the outset, one must assume that God leaves 
no fingerprints in the material world. 

This gives us no choice but to find a substitute for infinity that retains something of God, 
enough so that we feel his presence. The Book of Genesis declares that God created Adam in 
his own image, but we have been returning the favor almost since the beginning, fashioning 
God in our image over and over again. In India these images include almost every creature, 
event, or phenomenon. Lightning can be worshiped as coming from the god Indra, a rupee 
coin as a symbol of Lakshmi, goddess of prosperity. The taxicabs of Delhi and Bombay may 
be protected by plastic figures of Ganesh, a cheerfully smiling elephant with a potbelly, 
dangling from the rearview mirror. In all these cases, however, there is an understanding that 
only one thing is really being worshiped — the self. The same "I" that gives a person a sense of 
identity extending beyond the physical body, expanding to embrace nature, the universe, and 
ultimately pure spirit. 

In the West it would be exotic to worship a monkey god but scandalous to worship the self. 
The anecdote is told of an English anthropologist researching into the beliefs of Hinduism. 
One day he goes creeping through the forest and spies an old man dancing in a grove of trees. 
In ecstasy the old man embraces their trunks and says, "Lord, how I love you." Then he falls 
to the ground and chants, "Blessed are you, my Lord." Jumping to his feet, he raises his arms 
to the sky and cries, "I am overjoyed to hear your voice and see your face." 

Unable to stand the spectacle any longer, the anthropologist jumps out of the bushes. "I 
must tell you, my good man, that you are quite crazy," he says. 

"Why is that?" the old man asks in confusion. 

"Because here you are all alone in the woods, and you think that you're talking to God," 
says the anthropologist. 

"What do you mean, alone?" the old man replies. 

To anyone who worships God as the self, it is obvious that none of us are alone. The "self 
isn't personal ego but a pervasive presence that cannot be escaped. The East seems to have no 
difficulties here, but as you go west, uneasiness mounts. In the third century of the Christian 
era, an unknown heretic wrote, "If you don't make yourself equal to God, you can't perceive 
God." This belief did not succeed as dogma (the heresy here is of course that human and 
divine are not equal in Christianity), but at other levels it is undeniable. 

The God of any religion is only a fragment of God. This has to be true, because a being 
who is unbounded has no image, no role to play, no location either inside or outside the 
cosmos, whereas religions offer many images — father, mother, lawgiver, judge, ruler of the 
universe. There are seven versions of God, which can be associated with organized faiths. 
Each one is a fragment, but so complete as to create a unique world: 

Stage one: God the Protector 

Stage two: God the Almighty 

Stage three: God of Peace 

Stage four: God the Redeemer 

Stage five: God the Creator 

Stage six: God of Miracles 

Stage seven: God of Pure Being — "I Am" 



Each stage meets a particular human need, which is only natural. In the face of nature's 
overwhelming forces, humans needed a God who would protect them from harm. When they 
felt that they had broken the law or committed wrongdoing, people turned to a God who 
would judge them on the one hand and redeem their sins on the other. In this way, purely 
from self-interest, the project of creating God in our own image proceeded — and continues to 
proceed. 

Several of these stages, such as Redeemer and Creator, sound familiar from the Bible, and 
now that Buddhism has become more popular in the West, the final stage, where God is 
experienced as eternal silence and pure being, is not as foreign as it once would have been. 

But we are not comparing religions here; no stage is absolute in its claim to truth. Each one 
implies a different relationship, however. If you see yourself as one of God's children, then his 
relationship to you will be as a protector or a maker of rules; this relationship shifts if you see 
yourself as a creator — then you start to share some of God's functions. You stand on more 
equal ground, until finally, at the stage of "I am," the same pure being is common to both God 
and humans. In the progress from stage one to stage seven, the wide gap between God and his 
worshipers becomes narrower and eventually closes. Therefore we can say that we keep 
creating God in our image for a reason that is more than vanity; we want to bring him home to 
us, to achieve intimacy. Yet whether you see God as an almighty judge who punishes or as a 
benign source of inner peace, he isn’t exclusively that. 

To an atheist, all forms of deity are a false projection, pure and simple. We attribute human 
traits to God such as mercy and love, set these traits upon an altar, and then proceed to pray to 
them. Every image of God, then, including the most abstract ones, is completely empty (by 
abstract I mean the God of Islam and orthodox Judaism, neither of which is allowed to be 
portrayed with a human face). According to the atheist, religion is the ultimate illusion since 
we are only worshiping ourselves secondhand. 

There are two ways to respond to this accusation. The first is the argument that an infinite 
God should be worshiped in all ways; the second is the argument that God has to be 
approached in stages, for otherwise one could never close the huge gap between him and us. I 
think the second argument is the more telling one. Unless we can see ourselves in the mirror, 
we will never see God there. Consider the list again, and you will see how God shifts in 
response to very human situations: 

God is a protector to those who see themselves in danger. 

God is almighty to those who want power (or lack any way of getting power). 

God brings peace to those who have discovered their own inner world. 

God redeems those who are conscious of committing a sin. 

God is the creator when we wonder where the world came from. 

God is behind miracles when the laws of nature are suddenly revoked without 
warning. 

God is existence itself— "I Am " — to those who feel ecstasy and a sense of pure 
being. 


In our search for the one and only one God, we pursue the impossible. The issue isn't how 
many Gods exist, but how completely our own needs can be spiritually fulfilled. When 
someone asks, "Is there really a God?" the most legitimate answer is, "Who's asking?" The 
perceiver is intimately linked to his perceptions. The fact that we single out traits like mercy 



and love, judgment and redemption, shows that we are forced to give God human attributes, 
but that is absolutely proper if those traits came from God in the first place. In other words, a 
circle connects the human and the divine. From the virtual level, which is our source, the 
qualities of spirit flow until they reach us in the material world. We experience this flow as 
our own inner impulses, and this is also appropriate, because for every stage of God there 
exists a specific biological response. The brain is an instalment of the mind, but it is a very 
convincing one. All that we really know about the brain is that it creates our perception, our 
thinking, and our motor activity. But these are powerful things. On the material plane, the 
brain is our only way of registering reality, and spirit must be filtered through biology. 

No one uses the entire brain at once. We select from a range of built-in mechanisms. There 
are seven of these, as we saw, that directly relate to spiritual experience: 

1. Fight-or- flight response 

2. Reactive response 

3. Restful awareness response 

4. Intuitive response 

5. Creative response 

6. Visionary response 

7. Sacred response 

In the opening chapter I gave a thumbnail description of each, but even in abbreviated form 
you may have begun to see how much of your own spiritual life is based on habitual or even 
unconscious reflex: 

Fight or flight is a primitive, atavistic response to protect yourself, inherited from animals. 
It energizes the body to meet outside danger and threat. This is the reflex that sends a mother 
into a burning house to save her child. 

The reactive response makes us defend our ego and its needs. When we compete and seek 
to rise above others, we automatically look out for "me" as opposed to "the other." This is the 
reflex that fuels the stock market, political parties, and religious conflict. 

Restful awareness is the first step away from outside forces. This response brings inner 
calm in the face of chaos or threats. We turn to it in prayer and meditation. 

The intuitive response calls upon the inner world for more than peace and calm. We ask 
inside for answers and solutions. This state is associated with synchronicity, flashes of insight, 
and religious awakening. 

The creative response breaks free from old patterns. It gives up the known to explore the 
unknown. Creativity is synonymous with the flow of inspiration. 

The visionary response embraces a universal "me" in place of the isolated ego. It looks 
beyond all boundaries and is not fixed by the laws of nature that limit earlier stages. Miracles 
become possible for the first time. This response guides prophets, seers, and healers. 

The sacred response is completely free of all limitations. It is experienced as pure bliss, 
pure intelligence, pure being. At this stage, God is universal and so is the person. This 
response marks the fully enlightened of every age. 

Each of these is a natural response of the human nervous system, and we were all born 
with the ability to experience the entire range. In the face of danger, a burst of adrenaline 
creates the overwhelming urge to flee or to stay and fight. When this response is triggered, all 
kinds of changes take place in the physiology, including increased heart rate, ragged 
breathing, elevated blood pressure, etc. But if we sit down to meditate, this isn't the state of 
the nervous system — far from it. The same indicators that were elevated in fight or flight are 
now decreased, and the subjective feeling is that of peace and calm. 



These are well-documented facts medically, but I wish to take a step further, and it is a 
startling step. I contend that the brain responds uniquely in every phase of spiritual life. 
Scientific research is incomplete at the higher stages of inner growth, but we know that, where 
the spirit leads, the body follows. Faith healers do exist who transcend medical explanation. 
Only a few miles from where I was in the Himalayas, yogis sit in trances for days at a time; 
others can be buried for a week in an almost airless box or bring their breathing and heart 
rates down to nearly zero. Saints in every religion have been observed to live on little or no 
food (many of them declaring that they survive solely on the light of God). Visions of God 
have been so credible that their wisdom moved and guided the lives of millions; extraordinaiy 
acts of selflessness and compassion prove that the mind is not ruled by self-interest alone. 

We select a deity based on our interpretation of reality, and that interpretation is rooted in 
biology. The ancient Vedic seers put it quite bluntly: "The world is as we are." To someone 
living in a world of threat, the need for fight or flight is absolute. This pertains to a 
Neanderthal facing a saber-tooth tiger, a soldier in the trenches in World War I, or a driver 
frustrated with road rage on the L.A. freeways. We can match each biological response, in 
fact, with a specific self-image: 

RESPONSE IDENTITY IS BASED ON... 

Fight-or- flight response Physical body/physical environment 

Reactive response Ego and personality 

Restful awareness response Silent witness 

Intuitive response The knower within 

Creative response Co-creator with God 

Visionary response Enlightenment 

Sacred response The source of all 

Looking at the right-hand column, you have a clear outline of the stages of human growth. 

The fact that we are bom with the potential to go from simple survival to God-consciousness 
is the remarkable trait that sets our nervous systems apart from all other creatures. It is 
undeniable that complete inner growth is a tremendous challenge. If you are trapped in traffic, 
blood boiling with frustration, higher thoughts are blocked out. At that moment, under the 
influence of adrenaline, you identify with being confined and unable to do anything. 

In a different situation, when you are competing for a promotion at work, you see things 
from the ego's point of view. Now your anxiety isn't over survival (which is the root of the 
fight-or-flight response in animals) but getting ahead. Once again higher responses are 
blocked; you would be ruining your chances if you stopped competing and felt only love for 
the other candidates for the job. 

Change the response once more, and this viewpoint will also fade away. When you see a 
news report about dying children in Africa or a needless war somewhere far away, you may 
find yourself wanting to find a creative solution to the problem or you may just reflect 
internally on the pointlessness of suffering. These higher responses are subtler and more 
delicate. We also call them more spiritual, but in any situation the brain is responding from 
the highest level it can. The deeper mystery, which we will explore in this part of the book, 
centers on our ability to rise from an animal instinct to sainthood. Is this possible for 
everyone, or is the potential there only for the tiniest fraction of humanity? We will only find 
out by examining what each stage means and how a person rises up the ladder of inner 
growth. 

Despite the enormous flexibility of the nervous system, we fall into habits and repeated 
patterns because of our reliance on old imprints. This is never more true than with our beliefs. 

I was once walking down a side street in the old section of Cairo when a man jumped out of 



the shadows and began ranting at some passersby. Not knowing Arabic, I had no idea what he 
was preaching, but it was obvious from the vexation and rage in his face that his sermon had 
to do with fear of God. In every religion there is the same streak of fear whenever a person is 
certain that the world is dominated by threat, danger, and sin. Yet every religion also contains 
the strain of love whenever the world is perceived as abundant, loving, and nourishing. It is all 
projection. I am not finding fault here. We have the right to worship love, mercy, compassion, 
truth, and justice on the transcendent level, just as we have the right to fear judgment and 
divine rebuke. If you accept that the world is as we are, it is only logical to accept that God is 
as we are. 

1 . God the protector fits a world of bare survival, full of physical threats and danger. 

2. God the almighty fits a world of power struggles and ambition, where fierce 
competition rules. 

3. A God of peace fits a world of inner solitude where reflection and contemplation are 
possible. 

4. God the redeemer fits a world where personal growth is encouraged and insights prove 
fruitful. 

5. God the creator fits a world that is constantly renewing itself, where innovation and 
discovery are valued. 

6. A God of miracles fits a world that contains prophets and seers, where spiritual vision 
is nurtured. 

7. A God of pure being — "I Am " — fits a world that transcends all boundaries, a world of 
infinite possibilities. 

The wonder is that the human nervous system can operate on so many planes. We don't 
just navigate these dimensions, we explore them, meld them together, and create new worlds 
around ourselves. If you do not understand that you are multidimensional, then the whole 
notion of God runs off the rails. 

I remember as a boy that my mother once prayed for a sign or message from God — I 
believe she had had a dream that affected her deeply. One day the kitchen door was left open, 
and a large cobra crawled in. When my mother encountered it, she didn't scream or cry out 
but fell to her knees in reverence. To her, this snake was Shiva, and her prayers had been 
answered. 

Notice how much your response to this incident depends on interpretation. If you don't 
believe that Shiva can appear as an animal, it would seem crazy to revere a cobra, not to 
mention superstitious and primitive. But if all of nature expresses God, then we can choose 
which symbols express him best. I know one thing: I cannot share anyone else's 
consciousness. As much as I love my mother, her response is private and unique. What was a 
glorious symbol of God to her may frighten and repulse others. (I can remember many days 
sitting in school under the tutelage of Catholic brothers, wondering why anyone would kneel 
before the horrifying image of the crucifixion.) 

I was testing these key ideas with a group when a woman objected. "I don't understand this 
word projection. Are you saying that we just make God up?" she asked. 

"Yes and no," I replied. "A projection is different from a hallucination, which has no 
reality at all. A projection originates inside you, the observer, and therefore it defines your 
perception of reality — it is your take on infinity." 

"Which would make God just a comment about me?" she asked. 



"God cannot be just about you, but the portion of him that you perceive must be about you, 
because you are using your own brain and senses and memory. Since you are the observer, it 
is all right to see him through an image that is meaningful to you." 

I thought of St. Paul's most telling line about the role of the observer: "Now we see as 
through a glass, darkly." The passage is easier to understand if we set aside the King James 
poetry in favor of modern English: 

When I was a child, I spoke and saw things like a child. When I grew up, I had finished 
with childish things. Right now, we all see puzzling reflections, as in a clouded mirror, 
but then (when we meet God), we shall see face to face. My knowledge now is partial; 
then it will be whole, the way God knows me already. 

The standard interpretation is that when we are confined to a physical body, our perception 
is dim. Only on the day of judgment, when we meet God directly, will our perception be pure 
enough to see who he is and who we are. But that isn't the only way to interpret the passage. 
Paul could be making the point that the observer who is attempting to see who God is winds 
up seeing his own reflection. Since there is no way around this limitation, we have to make 
the best use of it that we can. Like a child growing up, we have to evolve toward a more 
complete vision, until the day arrives when we can see the whole as God does. Our self- 
reflections tell our own story along the way, usually in symbolic form as dreams do — hence 
the clouded mirror. 

Reality itself may be only a symbol for the workings of God's mind, and in that case the 
"primitive" belief — found throughout the ancient and pagan world — that God exists in every 
blade of grass, every creature, and even the earth and sky, may contain the highest truth. 
Arriving at that truth is the purpose of spiritual life, and each stage of God takes us on a 
journey whose end point is total clarity, a sense of peace that nothing can disturb. 


STAGE ONE: 

GOD THE PROTECTOR 
(Fight-or-Flight Response) 


Neurologists have long divided the brain into old and new. The new brain is an organ to be 
proud of. When you have a reasoned thought, it is this area of gray matter, primarily the 
cerebral cortex, that comes into play. Shakespeare was referring to the new brain (and using 
it) when he had Hamlet utter, "What a piece of work is a man, how noble in reason, how 
infinite in faculties." But Hamlet was also wrapped up in a murder case that called for 
vengeance, and as he dug deeper into the sins of his family, he dug deeper into his own mind. 
The old brain wanted its due; this is the part of us that claws for survival and is willing to kill, 
if need be, to protect us. 

The old brain is reflected in a God who seems not to possess much in the way of higher 
functions. He is primordial and largely unforgiving. He knows who his enemies are; he 
doesn't come from the school of forgive and forget. If we list his attributes, which many 
would trace back to the Old Testament, the God of stage one is 

Vengeful 
Capricious 
Quick to anger 
Jealous 



Judgmental — meting out reward and punishment 

Unfathomable 

Sometimes merciful 


This description doesn't only fit Jehovah, who was also loving and benevolent. Among the 
Indian gods and on Mount Olympus one encounters the same willful, dangerous behavior. For 
God is very dangerous in stage one; he uses nature to punish even his most favored children 
through storms, floods, earthquakes, and disease. The test of the faithful is to see the good 
side of such a deity, and overwhelmingly the faithful have. Primitive man experienced untold 
threats from the environment; survival was in question every day. Yet we know that these 
threats were not destined to prevail. Overarching was a divine presence that protected human 
beings, and despite his frightening temper, God the protector was as necessary to life as a 
father is inside a family. 

The old brain is stubborn, and so is the old God. No matter how civilized a person's 
behavior is, if you dig deep enough (Freud compared this to unearthing all the layers of an 
archaeological site) you'll find primitive responses. We know enough about this region, 
located at the bottom and back of the skull and rooted in the limbic system, to see that it acts 
much like our stereotype of Jehovah. The old brain isn't logical. It fires off impulses that 
destroy logic in favor of strong emotions, instant reflexes, and a suspicious sense that danger 
is always around the corner. The favorite response of the old brain is to lash out in its own 
defense, which is why the fight-or-flight response serves as its main trigger. 

"I don't care what you're telling us, there's something evil about this thing. It has a mind of 
its own. No one's going to stop it." The young father had been trying to hide his tears, but now 
his voice was shaking. 

"I know it can feel that way," I replied sadly. "But cancer is just a disease." I looked at him 
and stopped trying to explain the radiation treatments for his child. The father was beside 
himself, talking from pure fear and anger. "One day she has a headache, nothing to worry 
about. Now it has turned into this — whatever it is." 

"Astrocytoma — it's a kind of brain tumor. Your daughter's has advanced to Stage Four, 
which means it can't be operated on and is growing very fast." 

This conversation took place more than a decade ago. The parents were still in their early 
thirties, young blue-collar people who had no experience of this kind of catastrophe. Less than 
twenty-four hours had passed since they brought their twelve-year-old girl in. She had been 
having dizzy spells with recurring pain behind her eyes. After running a battery of tests, the 
presence of a malignancy showed up. Because cancer grows rapidly in children, the prognosis 
was likely to be fatal. 

"We aren't giving up," I said. "Medical decisions have to be made, and you both need to 
help." The parents looked numbed. "We're all praying for Christina," I said. "Sometimes it's 
just up to God." 

The father's face went dark again. "God? He could have prevented this whole damn thing. 
If he's going to let a senseless tragedy happen, why should we pretend he will make it go 
away?" I didn't respond, and the parents stood up to leave. "You just tell them to start with 
those treatments. We’ll make it through," the father said. He gathered his wife and they 
returned to their child's bedside. 

Hope failed in this moment of crisis, which means, if we are being totally honest, that God 
failed — the God of stage one, who should have protected his children. In crisis we are all 
thrown back on a deep sense of physical danger, and not just in the case of a cancer diagnosis. 
The loss of a job can feel like a matter of life and death. People wrangling over a bitter 
divorce at times act as if their former spouse has become a mortal enemy. The fact that the old 
brain exerts its influence age after age accounts for the durability of God's role as protector. 



Our primitive reactions to danger exist for a reason that is not going to be easily outgrown; the 
very structure of the brain guarantees this. The brain triggers the endocrine system, which 
injects adrenaline into the bloodstream to force the body — whatever the higher brain may 
think — to do its bidding. 

Put yourself in the position of an innocent defendant in a lawsuit. A stranger has brought 
charges against you, forcing you to appear before a judge. Despite your duty to act in 
accordance with the rule of law, certain primitive feelings will prove inescapable, and they are 
very Old Testament in nature: 

1 . You will want to get back at your accuser. Jehovah is vengeful. 

2. You will try to find anything that works to prove your case. Jehovah is capricious. 

3. You will boil over whenever you think of the injustice being done to you. Jehovah is 
quick to anger. 

4. You will want the court to pay attention to you as much as possible, seeing only your 
side of things. Jehovah is jealous. 

5. You will want your accuser punished after you are found innocent. Jehovah is 
judgmental — he metes out reward and punishment. 

6. You will lie awake at night wondering how this could have happened to you. Jehovah 
is unfathomable. 

7. You will be sustained by faith that the court ultimately won't punish you unjustly. 
Jehovah is sometimes merciful. 

(It's worth repeating that Jehovah is just an illustrative example — one could have substituted 
Zeus or Indra.) 

Because his role is to protect, the God of stage one fails when the weak fall prey to illness, 
tragedy, or violence. He succeeds whenever we escape danger and survive crisis. In the mood 
of triumph his devotees feel chosen. They exult over their enemies and once again feel safe 
(for a while) because heaven is on their side. 

Reason teaches us that aggression begets retaliation — we know this undeniably, given the 
tragic history of war. But there is a wall between the logic of the new brain, which is based 
upon reflection, observation, and the ability to see beyond bare survival, and the logic of the 
old brain. The old brain fights first — or runs away — and asks questions later. 

Who am I? ... 

A survivor. 

At each stage the basic question, "Who is God?" immediately raises other questions. The 
first of these is "Who am I?" In stage one identity is based upon the physical body and the 
environment. Survival is the foremost consideration here. If we look at biblical history, we 
find that the ancient Hebrews could survive in a harsh world much more easily than in a 
purposeless one. The hardships of their lives were many — it took persistent, unending toil to 
raise crops from the land; enemies abounded; and being in the middle of a much larger 
nomadic culture, the Hebrews were caught up in one migration after another. How could this 
life of bare subsistence be reconciled with any sort of benign God? 

One solution was to make him a capricious and unpredictable parent. This role is played 
out with great dramatic conviction in the Book of Genesis, which spends far more time over 
the fall of Adam and Eve than on their creation. 

The first man and woman are the ultimate bad children. The sin they commit is to disobey 
God's dictum not to eat of the tree of knowledge. If we examine this act in symbolic terms, we 



see a father who is jealous of his adult prerogatives: he knows best, he holds the power, his 
word is law. To maintain this position, it is necessary that the children remain children, yet 
they yearn to grow up and have the same knowledge possessed by the father. Usually that is 
permissible, but God is the only father who was never a child himself. This makes him all the 
more unsympathetic, for his anger against Adam and Eve is irrational in its harshness. Here is 
his condemnation of Eve: 

I will increase your labor and your groaning, 
and in labor shall you bear children. 

You shall be eager for your husband, 
and he shall be your master. 

Eve has such a reputation as temptress that we forget one thing — she is not overtly sexual 
until God makes her so. Being "eager for your husband" is part of the curse, as is the pain of 
giving birth. The rest of family life will have to bear the sentence pronounced upon God's son: 

With labor shall you win your food from the earth 
all the days of your life. 

It will grow thorns and thistles for you, 
none but wild plants for you to eat. 

You shall gain your bread by the sweat of your brow, 
until you return to the ground; 
for from it you were taken. 

Dust you are, to dust shall you return. 

This entire scene, which ends with Adam and Eve driven in shame from paradise, also 
divides a family, shattering the intimacy of the preceding days, when God would walk in 
Eden and enjoy himself with his children. But if paradise quickly turned into a faded dream — 
we are not far from the time when Cain kills his brother Abel — the lesson sank deep: humans 
are guilty. They alone made the world harsh and difficult; on their heads falls the blame for 
the agony of childbirth and the backbreaking toil of eking out a living. 

The Genesis story came about two thousand years before Christ and was written in final 
form by temple scribes, perhaps a thousand years after it originated. Women had been 
subjugated to men long before that, and the rigors of farming and childbearing are as old as 
humankind. So to arrive at the God of stage one, it was necessary to argue back from what 
already existed. 

When they asked, "Who am I?" the earliest writers of scripture knew that they were 
mortals subject to disease and famine. They had seen a huge percentage of babies die at birth, 
and many times their mothers perished as well. These conditions had to have a reason; 
therefore the family relationship with God got worked out in terms of sin, disobedience, and 
ignorance. Even so, God remained on the scene — he watches over Adam and Eve, despite the 
curse put upon them, and after a while he finds enough virtue in their descendant Noah to 
save him from the sentence of death placed upon every other offspring from the original seed 
family. 

Another irony is at work here, however. The only character in the episode of Eve and the 
apple who seems to tell the truth is the serpent. He whispers in Eve's ear that God has 
forbidden them to eat of the tree of good and evil because it will give them knowledge and 
make them equal to the father. Here are his exact words after Eve informs him that if they eat 
of the forbidden fruit, they will die: 



Of course you will not die. God knows that as soon as you eat it, your eyes will be 

opened and you will be like gods, knowing both good and evil. 

The serpent is holding out a world of awareness, independence, and decision making. All 
these things follow when you have knowledge. In other words, the serpent is advising God's 
children to grow up, and of course this is a temptation they cannot resist. Who could? (The 
famed authority on myth, Joseph Campbell, points out that at this time the wandering Hebrew 
tribes had moved into a territory where the prevailing religion was based on a wise, benign 
goddess of agriculture whose totem animal was the snake. In a complete reversal, the priests 
of Israel made the female the villain of the piece and her ally a wicked serpent.) 

Why would God want to oppose such a natural development in his children — why didn't 
he want them to have knowledge? He acts like the worst of abusive fathers, using fear and 
terror to keep his offspring in an infantile state. They never know when he will punish them 
next — worse than that, he gives no hope that the original curse will ever be removed. Good 
and bad actions are weighed, reward and punishment are handed out from the judge's bench, 
yet mankind cannot escape the burden of guilt, no matter how much virtue your life 
demonstrates. 

Rather than viewing the God of stage one harshly, we need to realize how realistic he is. 
Life has been incredibly hard for many people, and deep psychological wounds are inflicted 
in family life. We all carry around memories of how difficult it was to grow up and at any 
given moment, we feel the tug of old, childish fears. The survivalist and the guilty child lurk 
just beneath the surface. The God of stage one salves these wounds and gives us a reason to 
believe that we will survive. At the same time he fuels our needs. As long as we need a 
protector, we will cling to the role of children. 

How do I fit in? ... 

I cope. 

In stage one there is no indication that humans have a favored place in the cosmos — on the 
contrary. Natural forces are blind, and their power is beyond our control. Recently I saw a 
news report about a small town in Arkansas flattened by a tornado that struck in the middle of 
the night. Those who had survived were awakened by a deafening roar in the darkness and 
had the presence of mind to ran into their basements. As they surveyed the wreckage of their 
lives, the dazed survivors mumbled the same response: I'm alive only by the grace of God. 

They did not consider (nor express out loud) that the same God might have sent the storm. 
In crisis people seek ways to cope, and in stage one, God is a coping mechanism. This holds 
true wherever survival is in peril. In the worst ghetto areas ravaged by drags and street crime, 
one finds the most intense faith. Horrible situations stretch our coping skills beyond their 
limits — the random death of children gunned down in school would be an example — and to 
escape complete despair, people will project beyond hopelessness, finding solace in a God 
who wants to protect them. 


What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is safety, comfort, food, shelter, and family. 

Evil is physical threat and abandonment. 

An absolute standard of good and evil is something many people crave, particularly at a 
time when values seem to be crumbling. In stage one, good and evil seem to be very clear. 
Good derives from being safe; evil derives from being in danger. A good life has physical 



rewards — food, clothing, shelter, and a loving family — while if you lead a bad life you are left 
alone and abandoned, prey to physical danger. But is the picture really so clear? 

Once again the family drama must be taken into account. Social workers are well aware 
that abused children have a strange desire to defend their parents. Even after years of beatings 
and emotional cruelty, it can be nearly impossible to get them to testify to the abuse. Their 
need for a protector is too strong — one could say that love and cruelty are so interwoven that 
the psyche can't separate them. If you try to remove the child from the abusive environment, 
he is deeply afraid that you are snatching away his source of love. This confusion doesn't end 
with adulthood. The old brain has an overriding need for security, which is why so many 
abused wives defend their husbands and return to them. Good and evil become hopelessly 
confused. 

The God of stage one is just as ambiguous. Twenty years ago I read a poignant fable about 
a town that was perfect. Everyone in it was healthy and happy, and the sun always shone on 
their doorsteps. The only mystery in the town was that every day a few people walked away, 
silently and giving no explanation. No one could figure out why this was happening, yet the 
phenomenon didn’t end. We finally discover that a single child has been trapped by his 
parents in the basement, where he is tortured, out of sight. Those who walk away know this 
secret, and for them perfection has come to an end. The vast majority don't know, or if they 
do, turn their heads the other way. 

Fables can be read in many ways, but this one says something about our stage one God. 
Even if he is worshiped as a benign parent, one who never inflicted guilt upon us, his 
goodness is tainted by suffering. A father who provides with great love and generosity would 
be considered a good father, but not if he tortures one child. Anyone who considers himself a 
child of God has to consider this problem. Much of the time, as in the fable, it is papered over. 
The need for security is too great, and in addition there is only so much we can cope with at 
any one time. 


How do I find God? ... 

Through fear and loving devotion. 

If the God of stage one is double-edged, providing with one hand and punishing with the 
other, then he cannot be known only one way. Fear and love both come into play. For every 
biblical injunction to "love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, all thy strength, and all thy 
soul," there is a counterbalance. The injunction to "fear the Lord" is expressly stated in all 
faiths, even the faiths supposedly based on love. (Jesus speaks quite openly about the 
evildoers who will be "cast out with wailing and gnashing of teeth.") 

What this means in a deeper sense is that ambivalence is discouraged. Peace of a sort rules 
in a family where the children are told simply to love their parents but also feel secret anger, 
hatred, and jealousy toward them. The "official" emotion is only positive. An outsider may 
call this a false peace, but to the insider it works. But has negativity really gone away? It takes 
a great deal of growing up before one can live with ambivalence and its constant blending of 
dark and light, love and hate — this is the road not taken in stage one. 

A friend of mine told me a touching story of the day he grew up, as he saw it. He was a 
protected, even coddled child whose parents were very private. He never saw them disagree; 
they were careful to draw the boundary between what the adults in the family discussed 
between themselves and what they told the children. This is psychologically healthy, and my 
friend remembers an almost idyllic childhood, free of anxiety and conflict. 

Then one day when he was about ten, he woke up late one night to hear loud noises from 
downstairs. He felt a chill of fear, certain that some crime was taking place. After a moment 
he realized that his parents were having a loud argument. In great consternation he jumped up 



and ran downstairs. When he entered the kitchen he saw the two of them confronting each 
other. 

"Don't you lay a hand on her, or I'll kill you!" he shouted, rushing at his father. His parents 
were bewildered and did everything they could to calm the boy down — there had been no 
violence, only an angry disagreement — but even though he eventually grasped the situation, 
something deep had changed. He no longer could believe in a perfect world. 

The mixture of love and anger, peace and violence, that we all have to live with had 
dawned on him. In place of certainty there was now ambiguity — people he once trusted 
completely had showed that they possessed a darker side. By implication the same holds true 
for each of us and, by extension, for God. 

Everyone must face this conflict, but we resolve it in different ways. Some children try to 
preserve innocence by denying that its opposite exists; they turn into idealists and wishful 
thinkers. They show a strong streak of denial when anything "negative" takes place and will 
remain anxious until the situation turns "positive" again. Other children take sides, assigning 
all the anxiety-provoking traits to a bad parent while labeling the other as always good. Both 
of these tactics fall under the category of coping mechanisms; therefore it comes as no 
surprise to find how much they invade religious belief in stage one, which is all about coping. 

The good parent-bad parent solution takes the form of a cosmic battle between God and 
Satan. There is abundant proof in the Old Testament that Jehovah is willful and cruel enough 
to assume the role of bad parent by himself. Even a man of titanic righteousness like Moses is 
deprived in the end of being able to enter the promised land. No amount of fear and love, 
however you mix them, is enough to satisfy this God. His capriciousness knows no bounds. 
However, if this portrayal is unacceptable, there must be an "adversary" (the literal meaning 
of Satan's name) to take the blame away from God. Satan appears in the Old Testament as 
tempter, deceiver, stealer of souls, and the fallen angel Lucifer, who through pride tried to 
usurp God’s authority and had to be cast down to hell. You could say that he is the light gone 
bad. But never once is he described as an aspect of God. The division between the two makes 
for a much simpler story, as it does for a child who has decided that one parent must be the 
good one and the other bad. 

The other coping strategy, which involves denying the negative and seeking always to be 
positive, is just as common in religion. A lot of harm has to be overlooked to make God 
totally benign, yet people manage to do so. In the family drama, if there is more than one 
child, interpretations become fixed. One child will be absolutely sure that no abuse or conflict 
was ever present, while another will be just as certain that it was pervasive. The power of 
interpretation is linked to consciousness; things can't exist if you are not conscious of them, 
no matter how real they may be to others. In religious terms, some believers are content to 
love God and fear him at the same time. This duality in no way involves any condemnation of 
the deity. He is still "perfect" (meaning that he is always right) because those he punishes 
must be wrong. 

In this case faith depends on a value system that is preordained. If some ill befalls me, I 
must have committed a sin, even if I didn't have any awareness of it. My task is to look deep 
enough until I find the flaw inside myself, and then I will see the perfect judgment God has 
rendered. To someone outside the system, however, it appears that an abused child is figuring 
out, through convoluted logic, how to make himself wrong so that the cruel parent remains 
right. In stage one, God has to be right. If he isn't, the world becomes too dangerous to live in. 


What's my life challenge? ... 

To survive, protect, and maintain. 



Every stage of God implies a life challenge, which can be expressed in terms of highest 
aspiration. God exists to inspire us, and we express this through the aspirations we set for 
ourselves. An aspiration is the limit of the possible. In stage one, the limit is set by physical 
circumstances. If you are surrounded by threats, to survive is a high aspiration. This would be 
true in a shipwreck, a war, a famine, or an abusive family. However, each stage of God must 
give scope to the whole range of human abilities; even in the worst situations a person aspires 
to do more than cope. 

You might think that the next step would be escape. In stage one, however, escape is 
blocked by the reality principle. A child can't escape his family, just as famine victims often 
can't escape drought. So the mind turns instead to imitating God, and since God is a protector, 
we try to protect the most valuable things in life. Protectors take many forms. Some are 
policemen protecting the law, firemen protecting safety, social workers protecting the 
helpless. In other words, stage one is the most social of all the seven worlds we will examine. 
Here one learns to be responsible and caring. 

The reward for learning to protect others is that in return they give you their love and 
respect. Notice how furious the police become if they are taunted by the very people they are 
sworn to defend (this occurs in riots, political demonstrations, and racially divided 
neighborhoods). The protector craves respect. He is also inflexible about rules and laws. 
Being a guardian, he sees danger everywhere; therefore he is motivated to keep people in line 
"for their own good." This is essentially a parental feeling, and you will find that police 
officers can be fatherly, in both the good and bad sense. They may be quick to forgive 
offenses where the perpetrator acts humbled and chastised, but they are also prone to 
dispensing rough justice when a bad guy shows no remorse. Outright defiance is the worst 
response to a protector, who then feels completely justified in holding you to the letter of the 
law, just as Jehovah felt justified in punishing infractions of his law. Divine authority could 
be very cruel even to the chosen people, but those outside the law (meaning anyone with a 
different religion) deserve no mercy. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Courage. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

Fear of loss, abandonment. 

It isn't hard to figure out what you have to do to survive in a harsh world — you have to 
show courage in the face of adversity. The Old Testament is a world of heroes like Samson 
and David who fight battles and defeat enemies. Their victory is proof that God favors them. 
But as we saw, no amount of effort will totally appease this God. The courage to fight must 
eventually turn into the courage to oppose him. 

If we take it back to the family, a vicious circle is involved. If you are afraid of your father 
because of his violent and unpredictable temper, the prospect of facing him head-on will 
arouse even more fear. Thus the incentive to keep quiet gets strengthened. Unfortunately, 
keeping quiet only makes the fear worse, since it has no release. The only way out is to 
overcome the hurdle, which is true at every stage of God. As in the family, the devotee of a 
fearful God will not move on to a higher stage until he says, "I am tired of being afraid. You 
are not my God if I have to hide from your anger." 

In social terms we see this played out in rebellion against authority. A policeman who 
decides to testify against his fellow officers on charges of corruption walks a fine line. From 
one perspective he is a traitor, from another he has found a conscience. Which one is true? It 
all depends on where you are heading. Some people have to preserve the system, and since 



corruption is inevitable, they must decide how much bad can be stomached in the name of the 
common good. Fathers and mothers make such decisions every day over the bad behavior of 
their children, just as the police do over behavior under the law. But others look at the same 
system and decide that doing good isn’t consistent with breaking the rules you are assigned to 
enforce. Parents can't teach truth-telling while at the same time being liars; policemen can't 
accept bribes and at the same time arrest crooks. 

There is no clear line here. As organized religions demonstrate, it is possible to live a long 
time with an angry, jealous, unfair God, even though he is supposed to be the highest judge. 
Neither side of the line is better than the other; ultimately one must learn to live with 
ambivalence. 

The important issue is psychological. How much fear are you willing to live with? When 
this hurdle is cleared, when personal integrity is more important than being accepted within 
the system, a new stage begins. Thus the exhilaration felt by many war protesters. To them, 
demonstrations against authority mark a new birth of morality that is guided by principle 
rather than outside force. Now translate this to an inner war, with one voice urging rebellion 
and the other threatening you with punishment for breaking the law, and you have the core 
drama of stage one. 


What is my greatest temptation? ... 

Tyranny. 

You would think from the story of Adam and Eve that God's children were tempted to sin, 
but to me this is just the official version. The guardian wants you to obey; therefore he must 
make disobedience a wrongful act. The real temptation lies on God's side, just as it does with 
any protector who acts in his name. God's temptation is to become a tyrant. Tyranny is 
protection that has gone too far. It exists in families where the parents cannot balance rules 
with freedom. It exists in systems of law where mercy has been forgotten. 

The desire to rule is so seductive that we don’t need to delve very far into this particular 
temptation. It is more interesting to ask how it is ever escaped. The tyrant more often than not 
has to be deposed, overthrown by force. In some societies, as in some families, this happens 
through violence. The children rebel against authority by killing it; this takes place 
symbolically — through reckless teenage behavior with drinking and driving, for example. But 
short of violence there is a subtler mechanism for escaping any temptation, which is to see 
through the need for it. In Mafia films the gangsters inevitably run a protection racket. Under 
the pretext of keeping harm away from a storekeeper, they sell him insurance in the form of 
their protection. But this scheme works only through a lie, since the violence being held at 
bay comes from the gangsters themselves — they are the threat and the insurance. In spiritual 
terms, God's protection is valued only by denying that he is also the source of the threat. In 
the end, nothing is outside the deity, so asking him to protect you from storms, famine, 
disease, and misfortune is the same as asking the perpetrator. 

I was reading a psychiatric case study in which a father was very worried about his three- 
year-old daughter. The little girl couldn't sleep well and suffered from bouts of severe anxiety. 
The father sat up with her every night, reading fairy tales to her and trying to offer 
reassurance. 

"I read to her about Little Red Riding Hood and the big bad wolf," he told the therapist, 
"and when she gets scared, I tell her that there's nothing to worry about. I'm here to protect 
her." 

"So you can't understand why she still seems so frightened?" the therapist remarked. 

"Not at all," said the father. "Do I need to be even more reassuring?" 



"No, you need to ask yourself why you choose frightening stories when she is so 
frightened to begin with." 

The answer in this case is that the father was blinded by his need to be reassuring, a need 
rooted in his past — he had had an absent father who wasn't around to calm his child's fears. 
This is a telling anecdote, because it poses the central question in stage one: Why did God 
have to make such a frightening world? Was it just out of the temptation to tyrannize us? The 
answer doesn’t lie with God but in our interpretation of him. To get out of stage one, you must 
arrive at a new interpretation of all the issues raised so far — Who is God? What kind of world 
did he create? Who am I? How do I fit in? In stage two the basic problem of survival has been 
overcome. There is much less need for fear, and for the first time we see the emerging 
influence of the new brain. Even so, just as the reptilian brain is buried inside the skull, not 
abolished by the cerebrum or canceled out by higher thought, the God of stage one is a 
permanent legacy that everyone confronts before inner growth can be achieved. 


STAGE TWO: 
GOD THE ALMIGHTY 
(Reactive Response) 


If stage one is about survival, stage two is about power. There is no doubt that God has all the 
power, which he jealously guards. At the beginning of the scientific era, when the secrets of 
electricity were being discovered and the elements charted, many worried that it was sacrilege 
to look too closely at how God worked. Power was not only his but rightfully so. Our place 
was to obey — a view that makes perfect sense if you consider heaven the goal of life. Who 
would endanger his soul just to know how lightning works? 

Freud points out, however, that power is irresistible. It is one of the primary goods in life, 
along with money and the love of women (Freud's worldview was inescapably masculine). If 
Hamlet's dilemma is rooted in stage one, the hero of stage two is Macbeth, who finds it 
convenient to murder the king, his symbolic father, but then must wrestle with the demons of 
ambition. In the first act of Macbeth, when he meets the three witches on the heath, they 
predict that more and more power will come to him, until in the end he is king. But this is 
more than a prediction. Power is Macbeth's curse. It inflames his guilt, it forces him to 
abandon love; he lives in the shadows of night, sleepless and afraid of being plotted against; 
and in the end power drives him mad. The kind of God implied by the drive to power is 
dangerous, but he is more civilized than the God of stage one. In describing this new God we 
would say that he is 

Sovereign 

Omnipotent 

Just 

The answerer of prayers 

Impartial 

Rational 

Organized into rules 


Compared to the God of stage one, this version is much more social. He is worshiped by 
those who have formed a stable society, one that needs laws and governance. The Almighty is 
not so willful as his predecessor; he still metes out punishment, but you can understand 
why — the wrongdoer disobeyed a law, something he knows in advance not to do. Justice is no 



longer so rough; the kings and judges who take their power from God do so with a sense of 
being righteous. They deserve their power — or so they tell themselves. As with Macbeth, the 
wielders of power get caught up in urges that are all but irresistible. 

The drama of power is based on the reactive response, a biological need to fulfill ego 
demands. This response has not been studied well; we can surmise that it is associated with 
the midbrain, which lies between the oldest animal structures of the old brain and the 
rationality of the cerebral cortex. This is a shadowy region, and for decades no one really 
believed that ego — meaning your sense of identity and personality — was innate. Then studies 
in infant development by Jerome Kagan and others began to demonstrate that babies do not 
simply learn to have a personal identity. Almost from the moment of birth some newborns are 
outgoing, demanding in their needs, bold, and curious about the outside world, while others 
are introverted, quiet, undemanding, and shy about exploring their environment. These traits 
persist and expand through childhood and in fact remain for life. This implies that the ego 
response is built into us. 

The ruling dictum of the reactive response is "More for me." Taken too far, this leads to 
corruption, since eventually an insatiable appetite must run into the desires of others. But in 
biological terms the drive for more is essential. A newborn infant exhibits a total lack of 
discipline and control. Child psychiatrists believe that all boundaries are fluid in the 
beginning. The baby is enclosed in a womblike world where the walls, crib, blanket, and even 
mother's arms are still part of an undifferentiated, amorphous entity. To take this blob of 
sensation and find out where "I" begins is the first task of growing up. 

The birth of ego is primitive at first. When an infant touches a hot stove and draws away in 
shock, he remembers the pain not only as discomfort but as something "I" don't want. This 
sense of ego is so primary that we forget what it was like not to have it. Was there a time 
when I saw my mother smiling down at me and felt that her emotions were mine? Apparently 
not — without being able to thi nk or reflect, the seed of ego came into the world with us. Need, 
desire, pain, and pleasure were felt as "mine" and remained that way, only growing in 
intensity. 

Nor do we find any altruistic gods in world mythology. The first commandment given to 
Moses is "You shall place no other God before me." Jehovah survives all competitors in the 
Old Testament — we don't even witness much of a contest. But in other systems, such as the 
Greek and the Hindu, the war for power is constant, and one gets the sense that Zeus and 
Shiva have to keep their eyes open if they want to remain at the top of the pantheon. The 
Judaic God is a surprising victor in his emergence from a small, conquered nation that had ten 
of its twelve tribes wiped off the face of the earth by powerful foes, yet the subjugated 
Hebrews were able to look beyond their situation. They projected a stable, unshakable God 
who could not be touched by any shift of power on earth — the first God Almighty to survive 
all challengers. 

Jehovah succeeded because he exemplified a world that was fast evolving — the world of 
competition and ambition. Raw power is violent, while the power achieved through ambition 
is subtle. At the level of survival, you get the food you need by stealing it from others; sex is 
connected with rape or the stealing of women from another tribe. The God of stage two 
doesn't condone rape and pillage, however; he has structured a hierarchical world, one in 
which you can appeal to the king or the judge to settle who owns the crops and whose wife is 
legitimate. The struggle to bring in laws to replace sheer might divides stage one and stage 
two, although there is always the threat of reversion. Power addicts you to getting what you 
want, exposes you to the temptation to trample other people's needs according to the rule that 
might makes right. To prevent this we have a new God, an omnipotent judge who threatens 
even the most powerful king with retribution if he goes too far. 



Who am I? ... 
Ego, personality. 


Every parent is aware of the phase in a toddler's life associated with the "terrible twos," 
when power dawns. The two-year-old who throws tantrums, coaxes, wheedles, and 
manipulates any situation to get his way is testing his ego boundaries. Earlier time was spent 
mastering basic skills of bodily coordination, but now the time is ripe for discovering just how 
far I, me, mine will get you. Exasperated they might get, good parents do not stifle this sudden 
fascination with power. They realize that balance grows out of excess; without the testing of 
limits, the ego would either be cowed into submission or lost in grandiose fantasies. 

From its first days, the ego finds that making things go your way isn't automatic. Parents 
say no, and more important, have their own lives, which means that a child cannot usurp 
every moment of their attention. These are shocking discoveries, but as a young child adapts 
to them, he prepares for the bigger shock ahead — that there are other children who want to 
grab the love and attention that used to be yours by right. This contest of competing egos 
creates the drama of stage two. 

If you know yourself to be competitive and ambitious, it goes without saying that at some 
level you have given your allegiance to the God of this stage. Society rewards these traits so 
much that we tend to overlook their roots. Imagine that you and your older brother are both 
trying out for the same position on a Little League baseball team. When the time comes for 
the coach to make his decision, your feelings are those of a devotee before God the Almighty: 

1 . You have to abide by the coach's decision. The Almighty is sovereign. 

2. Even if you want to fight back, the adults have all the power. The Almighty is 
omnipotent. 

3. You have to believe that playing your best will make the decision fall in your favor. 
The Almighty is just. 

4. You can't help but hope that the coach knows how desperately you want to be on the 
team. The Almighty answers prayers. 

5. The coach is assumed to know what he is doing and capable of judging who is better 
than someone else. The Almighty is impartial and rational. 

6. You have to study the rules of baseball and abide by them. It does no good simply to 
beat your brother up to win a spot on the team. The Almighty lays down rules and 
laws. 

This psychology is not mere projection; the same kind of thinking conforms to the way 
society works. Thus the ego forms a bridge from the family, where your needs and whims are 
indulged, to the setting of school, where rules override your whims and many other children 
are taken into account. 

The ego is always tempted to return to the infant paradise in which food and love came 
automatically, without competition. This fantasy comes to the surface in adults who believe 
that they deserve everything they have earned, no matter by what means. When John D. 
Rockefeller was asked where his immense wealth came from, he gave the famous reply "God 
gave it to me." It is essential in stage two to feel this connection, for otherwise one would be 
competing with the Almighty. In Genesis, after God has created the first man and woman on 
the sixth day, he says, 

Be fruitful and multiply, fill the earth and subdue it, rule over the fish of the sea, the 

birds of heaven, and every living thing that moves upon the earth. 



When power was handed out, several features were notable. First, it was handed to both 
man and woman. This original couple precedes Adam and Eve; it remains a mystery why the 
writers of the books of Moses felt called upon to create human beings a second time, in a 
more sexist version. Second, there is no suggestion of aggression or violence. God gives 
humans plants to eat, with no suggestion that they are to kill anything for food. Finally, God 
looked at his work "and he saw that it was good," implying that he felt no competitiveness 
with mankind over who was to rule. In future ages, keeping the peace would often depend on 
surrounding a monarch with the aura of God-given rule. (Macbeth owes his worst troubles not 
to the fact that he committed murder but that he seized the crown unlawfully, against the 
divine right of kings.) 

The fantasy of getting everything for me doesn't often come tare, however; this isn't the 
time for the meek to inherit the earth. Stage two is dominated by a God who justifies strength 
and competition, with no thought that being a loser is possible. 

How do I fit in? ... 

I win. 

The theme of stage two can be summarized as "Winning is next to godliness." The 
Almighty approves of accomplishment. The Protestant work ethic sealed his approval into 
dogma. It is a very simple dogma, free of theological complications. Those who work the 
hardest will get the greatest reward. But did this belief actually derive from spiritual insight, 
or did people find themselves in a world where work needed to be done and added God’s 
stamp of approval afterward? Any answer we give would have to be circular, because the 
human situation is always being projected onto God, only to come back as spiritual truth. 

In stage one the Fall brings about the curse of having to labor until you return to the dust 
from whence you came. For work to be glorified now in stage two seems contradictory, yet 
this is exactly how inner growth proceeds. A certain problem is posed that cannot be solved in 
an earlier stage, and then it gets resolved by finding a new way to approach it. In other words, 
each stage involves a change of perspective or even a new worldview. 

If we take the Bible as our authority, there is ample evidence to support the notion that 
God approves of work, competition, and winning. None of the kings of Israel is punished for 
going to war. Joshua could not have brought down the walls of Jericho with a blast on a ram's 
horn if God hadn't aided him. A warrior God sides with David when he fights the Philistines 
against impossible odds — in fact, most of the Old Testament victories require miracles or 
God's blessing to be achieved. 

On the other hand, Jesus is adamantly opposed to war, and in general to work. He has no 
consideration for money, even promising (or so the disciples understood him) that one has 
only to wait for deliverance, and this meant deliverance from work, among other things. The 
Sermon on the Mount is in favor of letting God handle all earthly needs. One glance proves 
the point beyond a doubt: 

Do not store up for yourselves treasure on earth, where it grows rusty and moth-eaten, 

and thieves break in to steal it. Store up treasure in heaven instead.... 

No servant can be a slave to two masters.... You cannot serve God and Mammon 

[money]. 


Behold the lilies of the field. They do not toil, nor do they spin [cloth], yet I tell you, 
Solomon in all his glory was not attired like one of them. 



This sort of talk was disturbing. In the first place, it undercut the power of the rich. Jesus 
explicitly tells a wealthy man who is worried about the state of his soul that if he doesn't give 
away his money, he has no more chance of getting to heaven than a camel of passing through 
the eye of a needle — no chance at all. 

Even if you ignore the letter of what is being said — society has found countless ways to 
serve God and money at the same time — Jesus holds a completely different view of power 
than anyone around him. He doesn't equate power with achievement, work, planning, saving, 
or accumulation. If you take away those things, the ego collapses. All are necessary in order 
to build wealth, wage war, or divide the strong from the weak. These were the very goals 
Jesus did not want to further; therefore his rejection of power makes perfect sense. He wanted 
the human wolves to lie down with the lambs. 

However, this poses a huge conflict for we who follow the demands of our egos, who want 
to feel that we can be good and win at the same time. Some sort of work ethic is inevitable in 
stage two, yet it will always be haunted by the fear that God doesn't really approve of the 
things society rewards so lavishly. 


How do I find God? ... 

Awe and obedience. 

Stage two is much less paralyzed by fear of God than stage one, but the next closest 
emotion to fear — awe — is much present. The most primitive God could strike you dead with a 
sudden bolt of lightning, leaving the survivors to guess what you did to offend him. This new 
God punishes by the rules. Most of his rules make sense in broad outline; every society 
mandates against murder, theft, lying, and coveting property that belongs to someone else. 

Yet the Almighty doesn't have to make sense. As the medieval church fathers declared, God 
does not have to justify his ways to man. Eventually this attitude will change, but as long as 
the deity inspires awe, the way to him is through blind obedience. 

Every stage of God contains hidden questions and doubts. In this case the hidden question 
is: Can God really make good on his threats? The Almighty has to make sure that no one is 
tempted to find out, which means that he must exhibit his strength. The righteous must receive 
tangible rewards, the wrongdoers must feel his wrath. Psalm 101 affirms that a deal has been 
struck between God and the faithful: 

I sing of loyalty and justice; 

I will raise a psalm to thee, O Lord. 

I will follow a wise and blameless course, 

whatever may befall me. 

I will go about my house in purity of heart.... 

I will hate disloyalty; I will have none of it. 

As part of this loyalty oath, the psalm lists what will not be tolerated: crooked thoughts, 
backbiters, the proud and pompous, the wicked in general. 

I remember receiving a lesson in God's power when I was three; My parents had hired a 
nurse, or ayah , to take care of me because my mother was preoccupied with a new baby. My 
ayah was from Goa, a heavily Christian part of India with a strong European influence, and 
her name was Mary da Silva. Every day Mary took me to the park in my pram. After an hour 
or so, she would take me out and place me on the ground. Then she would draw a circle 
around me in chalk, telling me in a solemn voice that if I ventured outside the circle, the 



goddess Kali would eat my heart and spit out the blood. Naturally this promise frightened me 
to death, and I never dared go anywhere near the boundary. 

We are all like cows who will not cross a road that has a metal cattle guard laid down, for 
fear that they will catch their hoofs in it. Ranchers pull a simple trick on the animals by 
painting the shape of a cattle guard on the pavement, the mere sight of which will make the 
cows pull back. God's laws could be just such a phantom; for fear of hurting ourselves, we 
pull away from disobedience, even though we have never experienced divine punishment in 
real life. To this end we take ordinary misfortunes such as illness, bankruptcy, and loss of 
loved ones, and interpret them coming from God. 

What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is getting what you want. 

Evil is any obstacle to getting what you want. 

Obedience isn't an end unto itself. For obeying God's laws, the worshiper expects a reward. 
In stage two this takes the form of getting what you want. God permits you to fulfill your 
desires, and he makes you feel righteous in the bargain. In his role as Almighty, the deity now 
begins to answer prayers. In this value system, the rich can clothe themselves in virtue while 
the poor are morally suspect an seem shameful. (Lest anyone assume that this is a biblical 
tradition or just the fruit of the Protestant work ethic, in China mercantile success as a 
measure of goodness has been going on for centuries. Only the most self-denying sects of 
Buddhism have escaped the equation of wealth and God's favor.) 

As cut-and-dried as it appears, measuring good and evil according to rewards has its 
pitfalls. As every young child finds out to his dismay in preschool, others want the same 
things that you do, and sometimes there isn't enough to go around. Social rules prevent you 
from grabbing, hitting, and running away. Therefore the ego has to figure out how to 
aggrandize "me" while at the same time being good. Rarely does the solution emerge as pure 
honesty and cooperation. 

As a result, manipulation is bom. The goal of manipulation is to get what you want but not 
look bad in the process. If I want your toy and can charm you into giving it to me, then no one 
(including my conscience) can accuse me of stealing. This calculus is very important when 
you fear guilt, even more so if you fear that God is watching and keeping tabs. It seems 
strange that arch-manipulators are motivated by conscience, yet they are; the ability to tell 
right from wrong yet not completely heed the difference is what separates a manipulator from 
a criminal or a bully. 

Are these simply the kinds of shortcuts we are all tempted to use in order to get our way? 

If you turn to the Old Testament, there is no mistaking that God himself is manipulative. After 
destroying the world in a flood, his covenant with Noah blocks him from using totalitarian 
force. Thereafter he is subtler — praising those who hew to the law, withdrawing to show 
anger, sending an endless string of prophets to attack sin through preaching that stirs up guilt. 
We continue to use the same tactics in society, pressuring conformity to what the majority 
believe is good while disguising the evils that are done to the band of wrong-thinkers 
(pacifists, radicals, communists, etc.) who refuse to fall into line. 

What is my life challenge? ... 

Maximum achievement. 

Stage two isn't just a matter of naked power. It brings a sense of optimism to life. The 
world exists to be explored and conquered. If you watch a two-year-old as I, me, mine takes 



over, the sense of delight is inescapable. Ego gives you strength, although its lessons are often 
painful. 

The Buddhist doctrine of ego death as a road to enlightenment is something most people 
cannot accept. Ego death is based on a good argument, which goes as follows: the more you 
center your life on I, me, mine, the more insecure you will become. The ego believes in 
acquiring more and more. Its appetite for pleasure, power, sex, and money is insatiable. But 
more and more doesn’t make anyone happy. It leads to isolation, since you are getting your 
share at the cost of someone else's. It forces you to fear loss. Even worse, it makes you 
identify with externals, and that tendency can only wind up leaving you empty inside. At the 
deepest level, pleasure can never be the road to God because you get trapped in the cycle of 
duality (seeking pleasure and avoiding pain) while God is beyond all opposites. 

Convincing as the benefits of ego death may sound, few people would willingly sacrifice 
the needs of I, me, mine. In stage two this is particularly true because God gives his blessing 
to those who achieve. 

I was once consulted by a retired executive who was certain he had a hormone problem. I 
asked him about his symptoms. 

"Where can I begin?" he complained. "Fve lost all my energy. Half the time I don't want to 
get out of bed in the morning. Hours go by while I just sit in a chair, feeling gloomy and 
wondering if life has any point to it." 

On the surface this was a case of depression, probably brought on by the man's recent 
retirement. Medically it's well documented that sudden retirement can be dangerous. Men 
with no history of heart attack or cancer can unexpectedly die of these illnesses; one study 
found that the average life expectancy of retired executives was only thirty-three months on 
average. 

I dutifully ran a battery of tests, but as I suspected, there was nothing wrong with this 
man's endocrine system. The next time 1 saw him, I said, "Would you do something simple for 
me? Just close your eyes and sit in silence for ten minutes. Don’t look at your watch, I'll keep 
time for you." 

Although a bit suspicious, he did as I asked. Ten minutes passed, the last five obviously 
being hard for him, to judge by his fidgety movements. Opening his eyes, he exclaimed, 

"Why did you make me do that? How pointless could anything be?" 

"You were getting pretty restless," I remarked. 

"I wanted to jump out of my chair," he said. 

"So it doesn't look like our problem is lack of energy." My remark took him aback, and he 
looked baffled. "I don't think this is a hormone problem, metabolism, or depression," I said. 
"You've spent years organizing your external life, running a business, directing a large work 
force, and all that." 

"Right, and I miss all that more than I can tell you," he mourned. 

"I understand. And now that you have no external focus, what do you find? You've paid 
almost no attention to organizing your inner life. Your problem isn't lack of energy, it's chaos. 
Your mind was trained to order everything around you at the cost of discovering what it 
would be like to have internal order." 

This man had devoted his life to the values of stage two, and the challenge he faced now 
was to expand, not outwardly, but inside. In stage two the ego is so bent on accomplishment 
that it ignores the threat of emptiness. Power for its own sake has no meaning, and the 
challenge of acquiring more and more power (along with its symbols in terms of money and 
status) still leaves a huge vacuum of meaning. This is why absolute loyalty is demanded by 
God at this stage — to keep the faithful from looking too deeply inside. Let's clarify that this is 
not an actual demand made by the Almighty; it is another projection. The retired executive in 
my anecdote had a decision to make, whether to begin to cultivate an inner life or to start up 



some enterprise that would give him a new external focus. The course of least resistance 
would be to gear up a second business; the harder road would be to heal the disorder of his 
inner life. This is the choice that carries everyone from stage two to stage three. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Accomplishment. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

Guilt, victimization. 

Anyone who finds satisfaction in being an accomplished, skilled worker will find stage 
two a very tempting place to rest on the spiritual journey. Often the only ones who break free 
to a higher stage have had some drastic failure in their lives. This isn’t to say that failure is 
spiritually worthy. It carries its own dangers, primarily that you will see yourself as a victim, 
which make the chances for spiritual progress worse than ever. But failure does raise 
questions about some basic beliefs in stage two. If you worked hard, why didn’t God reward 
you? Does he lack the power to bestow good fortune — or has he forgotten you entirely? As 
long as such doubts don't arise, the God of stage two is the perfect deity for a competitive 
market economy. He has been cynically referred to as the God of getting and spending. 
However, there is still the problem of guilt. 

"I came from a small town in the Midwest, the only student from my high school to ever 
make it to the Ivy League. Getting in was the prize I valued the most," a friend of mine 
recalled. 

"A month ago I was leaving work at my law firm, on the way to a new restaurant. I was 
late, and as it happened, a homeless man had chosen the doorway of our building to spend the 
night. He was blocking the door, and I had to step over his body to get into the cab. Of course 
I've seen homeless people before, but this was the first time I literally had to walk over one. 

"I couldn't shake that image the whole time I was riding uptown, and then I remembered 
that the first month I was in college, twenty years ago, I was walking in the part of Boston 
known as the Combat Zone. It was one string of bars and adult bookstores after another. I was 
scared and intrigued at the same time, but as I was leaving, a stumblebum on the sidewalk 
ahead of me went into a seizure. He fell down, and some people ran to call an ambulance, but 
I just kept on walking. Twenty years later, sitting there in the cab, I could feel the old remorse 
wash over me. I had been lying to myself, you see. The homeless man in front of my building 
wasn’t the first time I had walked over somebody." 

Despite its external rewards, stage two is associated with the birth of guilt. This is a form 
of judgment that requires no all-seeing authority, except at the beginning. Someone has to lay 
down the commandments defining absolute right and wrong. Afterward, the law-abiding will 
enforce their own obedience. If you translate the process back to the family, the origins of 
guilt can be traced along the same lines. A two-year-old who tries to steal a cookie is 
reprimanded by his mother and told that what he is doing is wrong. Until that point taking a 
cookie isn't stealing; it is just following what your ego wants to do. 

If the child repeats the same act again, it turns into stealing because he is breaking a 
commandment, and in most families some sort of punishment will follow. Now the child is 
caught between two forces — the pleasure of doing what he wants and the pain of being 
punished. If a conscience is to develop, these two forces have to be fairly equal. In that case, 
the child sets up his own boundaries. He will take a cookie when it is "right" (permitted by 
mother) and not take one when it is "wrong" (causes guilt through a bad conscience.) 

Freud called this the development of the superego, our internal rule maker. Super means 
above, in that the superego watches over the ego from above, holding the threat of punishment 



ever at the ready. Learning to modify the harshness of the superego can be extremely difficult. 
Just as some believers never get to the point of accepting that God might be willing to bend 
the rules every once in a while, neurotics have never learned how to put their conscience in 
perspective. They feel tremendous guilt over small infractions; they develop rigid emotional 
boundaries, finding it hard to forgive others; self-love remains out of reach. Stage two brings 
the comfort of laws clearly set down, but it traps you into putting too much value on rules and 
boundaries, to the detriment of inner growth. 

What is my greatest temptation? ... 

Addiction. 

It's no coincidence that a wealthy and privileged society is so prone to rampant addictions. 
(1) Stage two is based on pleasure, and when pleasure becomes obsessive, the result is 
addiction. If a source of pleasure is truly fulfilling, there is a natural cycle that begins with 
desire and ends in satiation. Addiction never closes the circle. 

Stage two is also power-based, and power is notoriously selfish. When a doting parent 
finds it almost impossible to let a coddled child break free, the excuse may be "I love you too 
much, I don't want you to grow up." Yet the unspoken motive is self-centered: I crave 
pleasure it brings me to have you remain a child. The God of stage two is jealous of his power 
over us because it pleases him. He is addicted to control. And like human addiction, the 
implication is that God is not satisfied, no matter how much control he exerts. 

Psychiatrists meet people every day who complain about the emotional turmoil in their 
lives and yet are blindly addicted to drama. They cannot survive outside the dance of love- 
hate; they create tension, foster mistrust, and never leave well enough alone. Other addictions 
are also based on behavior: the need to have something wrong in your life (or to create it if it 
doesn't exist), the obsession over things going wrong — this is the "what if addiction — and 
finally the compulsion to be perfect at all costs. 

This last addiction has taken secular form in people who crave the perfect family, perfect 
home, and perfect career. They do not even see the irony that such "perfection" is dead; it can 
be bought only at the price of killing our inborn spontaneity, which by its nature can never be 
controlled. There is a corresponding spiritual state, however, that aims to please God through 
a life that has no blemish whatever. In the loyalty oath of Psalm 101, the believer makes 
promises no one could live up to: 

I will set before myself no sordid aim ... 

I will reject all crooked thoughts; 

I will have no dealing with evil. 

Such absolutism itself amounts to an addiction — and it is here in stage two that fanaticism 
is born. 

The fanatic is caught in a self-contradiction. Whereas an orthodox believer can feel 
satisfied if he obeys the law down to the last detail, the fanatic must purify his very thoughts. 
Complete control over the mind is unachievable, but this doesn't prevent him from imposing 
ever-stricter vigilance on "crooked thoughts." Fanatics are also obsessed by other people's 
purity, opening an endless quest to police human imperfection. 

This fate lies in wait for those who get stuck in stage two: They lose sight of the actual 
goal of spiritual life — to free humans and allow them to live in innocence and love. This loss 
cannot be repaired until the devotee stops being so concerned with the law. To do that he must 
find an inner life, which will never happen as long as he is policing his own desires. Vigilance 
kills all spontaneity in the end. When a person begins to see that life is more than trying to be 


perfect, the bad old desires rear their heads again. Only this time they are seen as natural, not 
evil, and the road is open for stage three. It comes as a source of wonder when turning inward 
breaks the spell of I, me, mine and ends its cravings. 


STAGE THREE: 

GOD OF PEACE 
(Restful Awareness Response) 


No one could accuse the earlier God of stages one or two of being very interested in peace. 
Whether unleashing floods or inciting warfare, the God we've seen so far relishes struggle. 

Yet even such powerful ties as fear and awe begin to fray. "You believe that you were created 
to serve God," an Indian gum once pointed out, "but in the end you may discover that God 
was created to serve you." The suspicion that this might be true launches stage three, for until 
now the balance has all been in God's favor. Obedience to him has mattered far more than our 
own needs. 

The balance begins to shift when we find that we can meet our own needs. It takes no God 
"up there" to bring peace and wisdom, because the cerebral cortex already contains a 
mechanism for both. When a person stops focusing on outer activity, closes his eyes, and 
relaxes, brain activity automatically alters. The dominance of alphawave rhythms signals a 
state of rest that is aware at the same time. The brain is not going to sleep, but it is not 
thinking, either. Instead there is a new kind of alertness, one that needs no thoughts to fill up 
the silence. Corresponding changes occur in the body at the same time, as blood pressure and 
heart rate decrease, accompanied by lessened oxygen consumption. 

These various changes do not sound overly impressive when put in technical terms, but the 
subjective effect can be dramatic. Peace replaces the mind's chaotic activity; inner turmoil 
ceases. The Psalms declare, "Commune with your own heart on your bed, and be still." And 
even more explicitly, "Be still and know that I am God." This is the God of stage three, who 
can be described as 

Detached 

Calm 

Offering consolation 

Undemanding 

Conciliatory 

Silent 

Meditative 

It hardly seems possible that this nonviolent deity emerged from stage two — and he didn't. 
Stage three transcends the willful, demanding God that once prevailed, just as the new brain 
transcends the old. Only by discovering that peace lies within does the devotee find a place 
that divine vengeance and retribution cannot touch. In essence the mind is turning inward to 
experience itself. This forms the basis of contemplation and meditation in every tradition. 

The first solid research on the restful awareness response came with the study of mantra 
meditation (specifically Transcendental Meditation) in the 1960s and 1970s. Until then the 
West had paid little scientific attention to meditation. It didn't really occur to anyone that if 
meditation was genuine, some shift in the nervous system must accompany it. Early 
experiments at the Menninger Foundation had established, however, that some yogis could 
lower their heart rate and breathing almost to nil. Physiologically they should have been on 



the brink of death; instead they reported intense inner peace, bliss, and oneness with God. Nor 
was this phenomenon simply a curiosity from the East. 

In December 1577 a Spanish monk in the town of Avila was kidnapped in the middle of 
the night. He was carted off to Toledo, to be thrown into a church prison. His captors were not 
bandits but his own Carmelite order, against whom he had committed the grave offense of 
taking the wrong side in a fierce theological dispute. As advisor to a house of Carmelite nuns, 
he had given them permission to elect their own leader instead of leaving it to the bishop. 

From our modem perspective this dispute is all but meaningless. But the monk's superiors 
were seriously displeased. The monk underwent horrendous torture. His unlit cell "was 
actually a small cupboard, not high enough for him to stand erect. He was taken each day to 
the rectory, where he was given bread, water, and sardine scraps on the floor. Then he was 
subjected to the circular discipline: while he knelt on the ground, the monks walked around 
him, scouring his bare back with their leather whips. At first a daily occurrence, this was later 
restricted to Fridays, but he was tortured with such zeal that his shoulders remained crippled 
for the rest of his life." 

The tormented monk has come down to us as a saint, John of the Cross, whose most 
inspired devotional poetry was written at this exact time. While imprisoned in his dark 
cupboard, Saint John cared so little about his ordeal that the only thing he begged for was a 
pen and paper so he could record his ecstatic inner experiences. He felt a particular joy at 
communing with God in a place the world couldn't touch: 

On a dark, secret night, 
starving for love and deep in flame, 

0 happy, lucky flight! 
unseen I slipped away, 

my house at last was calm and safe. 

These opening lines from "Dark Night" describe the escape of the soul from the body, 
which delivers the poet from pain to joy. But for this to happen, the brain has to find a way to 
detach inner experience from outer. In medicine we ran across instances where patients seem 
remarkably immune to pain. In cases of advanced psychosis, someone who has become 
catatonic is rigid and unresponsive to stimulation. There is no sign of reacting to pain — just as 
with a patient whose nerves are dead. Chronic schizophrenics have been known to cut 
themselves with knives or burn their arms with lit cigarettes while showing no awareness of 
pain. 

We cannot simply lump a great poet and saint, however, with the mentally ill. In the case 
of St. John of the Cross, there was a pressing need to separate from his tormentors. He had to 
find an escape route, and perhaps that was the psychological trigger for his ecstasy. In his 
poetry he flees to his secret lover, Christ, who caresses and soothes him in his arms: 

... and there 

my senses vanished in the air. 

1 lay, forgot my being, 

and on my love I leaned my face. 

All ceased. I left my being, 
leaving my cares to fade 
among the lilies far away. 



Saint John describes with precisely chosen words the transition from the material level our 
bodies are trapped in to the quantum level where physical pain and suffering have no bearing. 
Lying beneath the spiritual beauty of the experience, its basis is the restful awareness 
response. 

To put yourself in a comparable situation, imagine that you are a marathon runner. 
Marathons test the body's extremes of endurance and pain; at a certain point long-distance 
runners enter "the zone," a place that transcends physical discomfort. 

1 . The runner no longer feels pain as part of his experience. The God of peace is 
detached. 

2. The runner’s mind stops fighting and struggling. The God of peace is calm. 

3. The zone makes one feel immune to harm. The God of peace offers consolation. 

4. Winning and losing are no longer a driving force. The God of peace is undemanding. 

5. There is no need to fight; the zone will take care of everything. The God of peace is 
conciliatory. 

6. The runner’s mind quiets down. The God of peace is silent. 

7. In the zone one expands beyond the limits of the body, touching the wholeness and 
oneness of everything. The God of peace is meditative. 

I have heard of professional football players who claim that at a certain point in every 
game, the game takes over, and they feel as if they are going through the motions of a dance. 
Instead of using every ounce of will to make it downfield to catch a pass, they see themselves 
running ahead and meeting the ball as if destined. The God of peace isn't found by diving 
within so much as he rises from within when the time is right. 

Who am I? ... 

A silent witness. 

The God of stage three is a God of peace because he shows the way out of struggle. There 
is no peace in the outer world, which is ruled by struggle. People who attempt to control their 
environment — I am thinking of perfectionists and others caught up in obsessive behavior — 
have refused the invitation to find an inner solution. 

"I wasn't raised with any feelings about religion," one man told me. "It was a nonissue in 
my childhood and remained that way for years. I laid out some huge goals for myself, which I 
intended to accomplish on my own — the important job, the wife and kids, retirement by the 
age of fifty, all of it." 

This man came from considerable wealth, and for him a job wasn't important unless it 
meant CEO. He achieved that aim; by his midthirties he headed up an equipment-supply 
company in Chicago. Everything was moving on track until a fateful game of racquetball. 

"I wasn’t pushing myself or playing harder than usual, but I must have done something 
because I heard a loud snap, and all at once I was falling over. The whole thing happened in 
slow motion. I knew at once that I had torn my Achilles tendon — only the strangest thing was 
happening." Instead of being in excruciating pain, he felt extremely calm and detached. "The 
whole thing could have been happening to someone else. I lay there while someone called an 
ambulance, but my mind was floating somewhere beyond." 

The sensation at that moment was of a sweet, even blissful calm. The man — we will call 
him Thomas — had never experienced such a state, and it persisted even when his ankle did 
start to swell and ache with pain. During the time Thomas was hospitalized in traction, he 
noticed that his newfound peace gradually waned. He found himself wondering if he had 



experienced something spiritual after all, but after some intense scrutiny of scriptures, 

Thomas couldn’t really put his finger on any specific passage that corresponded to what had 
occurred. 

It is common for people to break into stage three with this kind of abruptness. In place of 
an active, excited mind, they find a silent witness. Interpretations differ widely. Some people 
jump immediately into religion, equating this peace with God, Christ, or Buddha; others 
register the whole thing simply as detachment: "I used to be inside the movie," one person 
explained, "but now I am sitting in the audience watching it." 

Medically we know that the brain can choose to cancel out awareness of pain. Until the 
discovery of endorphins — the brain's own version of morphine — there was no biological 
explanation for this self-anesthesia. Yet endorphins are not enough to account for Saint John’s 
ecstasy or the inner calm of the man who tore his Achilles tendon. If you examine the body's 
painkilling mechanisms, it becomes clear that the brain does not give itself a simple injection 
of opiates when pain is present. There are many situations where pain cannot be overcome at 
all or only partially, and sometimes it takes a trick to get the brain to react. If you take people 
suffering from intractable pain, a certain number will get relief if you inject them with saline 
solution while telling them that it is a powerful narcotic. The whole area of treatment is 
psychological — it is a matter of changing someone's interpretation. One also recalls the 
famous "show surgeries" under the Maoist regime, where patients stayed cheerfully awake 
during appendectomies, chatting and drinking tea. Their only anesthesia was provided with 
acupuncture, yet when attempts were made to duplicate this feat outside China, results were 
unreliable at best. The difference in perception was too great between Eastern belief and 
Western skepticism. 

In between the pain and the brain something must intervene that decides how much 
discomfort is going to be felt, and the amazing thing is that this decision maker can control 
our body's response totally. The switch for pain is flicked mentally. It is just as normal to feel 
no pain as to feel a great deal. To someone who has entered stage three, the decision maker is 
not a mystery. He is the presence of God bringing peace, and the pain being relieved is more 
than physical; it includes the pain of the soul caught in turmoil. By going inward, the devotee 
has found a way to stop that pain. 


How do I fit in? ... 

I remain centered in myself. 

A dangerous God was just right for a dangerous world. The God of peace is no longer 
dangerous because he has created a world of inner solitude and reflection. When you go 
inward, what do you reflect on? The inner world seems to be a landscape we all know very 
well. It is filled with thoughts and memories, desires and wishes. If you focus on these events, 
which rush by in the stream of consciousness, the inner world isn't a mystery. It may be 
complex, because our thoughts are so varied and come from so many places, but a mind filled 
with thought is not an enigma. 

Someone who has arrived at stage three is reflecting on something very different. A 
therapist would call it the core or center of a person. At the mind's center there aren't any 
events. You are simply yourself, waiting for thoughts to happen. The whole point of 
"remaining centered" is that you aren't easily thrown off balance. You remain yourself in the 
midst of outer chaos. (One is reminded of the football player who is so focused that the game 
starts to play itself while he begins to move to catch the ball as though preordained.) 

In many ways finding your center is the great gift of stage three, and the God of peace 
exists to assure his worshiper that there is a place of refuge from fear and confusion. "Now I 
shall lie down in peace, and sleep," says Psalm 4, "for you alone, O Lord, makest me 



unafraid." The absence of peace in the world is never far from the minds of the writers of 
scripture. Some of the strife is just part of how life is, but much of it is political. The angels 
who greet the shepherds with the news of Christ's birth include the promise of peace on earth 
and goodwill among men, reflecting the fact that a messiah's function was to settle the 
turbulent history of the chosen people once and for all. 

A warrior God didn't solve the problem, nor did laying down countless laws. The God of 
peace can't simply dictate an end to strife and struggle. Either human nature has to change or 
else it must disclose a new aspect that transcends violence. In stage three the new aspect is 
centeredness. If you find your own inner quiet, the issue of violence is solved, at least for you 
personally. A friend of mine who has been deeply influenced by Buddhism goes even further: 
he says that if you can find the motionless point at your core, you are at the center of the 
whole universe. 

"Haven't you noticed driving down the highway that you can pretend not to be moving? 
You reverse your point of view, so that you remain still while the road and the scenery do all 
the moving. The same trick can be done when you are out jogging. Everything else is in 
motion, flowing past you, but you yourself remain hovering in place." Most of us would find 
it easy to pull off this trick, but he sees a greater significance here. "That still point which 
never moves is the silent witness. Or at least it's as close as most of us can get. Once you find 
it, you realize that you don't have to be lost in the endless activity going on around you. 

Seeing yourself at the center of everything is just as legitimate." 

In the East much the same argument has been made. Buddhism, for example, doesn't 
believe that personality is real. All the labels we apply to ourselves are just a flock of different 
birds that happen to roost on the same branch. The fact that I am over fifty, Indian, a 
physician by training, married with two children, and so forth doesn't describe the real me. 
These qualities have chosen to roost together and form the illusion of an identity. How did 
they all find the same branch? Buddhism would say that I pulled them in by attraction and 
repulsion. In this lifetime I preferred to be male rather than female, Eastern rather than 
Western, married rather than single — and on and on. Choosing to be this instead of that is 
totally arbitrary. For each choice, its opposite would be just as valid. However, because of 
tendencies from my past (in India we would say my past lives, but that isn't necessary) I make 
my particular choices. I am so bound up in these preferences that I actually think they are me. 
My ego looks at the house, the car, the family, the career, the possessions, and it says, "I am 
those things." 

But in Buddhism, none of it is true. At any moment the birds resting on the branch can fly 
away. In fact this will happen when I die. If my soul survives (the Buddha did not commit 
himself about what happens after death) my choices will dissolve in the wind once I give up 
this body. So who am I if not all these millions of choices that cling to me like a glued-on 
overcoat? I am nothing except the still point of awareness at my center. Strip away every 
experience I have ever had and that remains. To realize this truth is to be free, so Buddhism 
teaches. Therefore seeing yourself as a motionless point while driving down the freeway 
becomes a valued experience. You are one step closer to finding out who you really are. 

How do I find God? ... 

Meditation, silent contemplation. 

The fact that stage three is self-centered cannot be denied. The Old Testament clearly 
states that the way to peace is through reliance on God as an outside power. He is the focus of 
attention, always. Verses on this point read, "Great peace have they who love your laws" and 
"You will keep him in perfect peace whose mind is fixed on you, because he puts his trust in 
you." Giving up trust in God and looking instead to yourself could be very dangerous. It could 



also be heresy. After the Fall, sin separated man and God. The deity is "up there" in his 
heaven, while I am "down here" on earth, a place of tears and struggle. In this scheme I am 
permitted to pray to God, calling out for his help and comfort, but he decides whether to 
return the call. It is not for me to try to make the connection permanent. My imperfection — 
and the laws of God — forbid it. 

A few clues indicate that I can risk a different approach, however. In the Bible one finds 
such verses as "Seek ye the kingdom of heaven within." And the means of going inward, 
chiefly meditation and silent contemplation, are not that far removed from prayer. If it is true 
that "in silence shall you possess your soul," then how much can God care how I find silence? 
The religious arguments become secondary once we realize that a biological response lies 
behind restful awareness, no matter what faith we clothe it in. 

The Eastern origins of meditation are undeniable, and in the Hindu tradition, going inward 
begins a spiritual quest that will eventually end in enlightenment. Dr. Herbert Benson of 
Harvard, who played the key role in popularizing meditation without religion, based his 
"relaxation response" on the principles of Transcendental Meditation, minus its spiritual 
implications. He removed the mantra, replacing it with any neutral word that could be 
repeated mentally while slowly breathing in and out (he suggested the word one). Others, 
including myself, have disagreed with this approach and based our approach on the central 
value of a mantra as a means of unfolding deeper spiritual levels inside the mind. To us, the 
recited word has to be connected to God. 

The spiritual properties of mantras have two bases. Some orthodox Hindus would say that 
every mantra is a version of God's name, while others would claim — and this is very close to 
quantum physics — that the vibration of the mantra is the key. The word vibration means the 
frequency of brain activity in the cerebral cortex. The mantra forms a feedback loop as the 
brain produces the sound, listens to it, and then responds with a deeper level of attention. 
Mysticism isn't involved. A person could use any of the five senses to enter this feedback 
loop. In the ancient Shiva Sutras, more than a hundred ways of transcending are described, 
among them looking into the blue of the sky and then looking beyond it, seeing the beauty of 
a woman and then finding what is behind that beauty. The whole intent is to go past the senses 
in order to find their source. (The cliche that Buddhists stare at their navels is a distortion of 
the practice of concentrating the mind on a single point; the navel is imagined as just such a 
point. In some traditions it also serves as a focus of energy that is supposed to have spiritual 
significance.) 

In all cases the source is a finer state of brain activity. The theory is that mental activity 
contains its own mechanism for becoming more and more refined until complete silence is 
experienced. Silence is considered important because it is the mind's source; as the mantra 
grows fainter and fainter, it eventually fades away altogether. At that point one's awareness 
crosses the quantum boundary. For the first time in our stages of inner growth, the material 
plane has been left behind; we are now in the region where spiritual activity commands its 
own laws. 

The argument persists that nothing of this kind is happening, that a brain learning to calm 
down may be comforting, but it isn't spiritual. This objection can be settled by noting that 
there really is no fundamental disagreement going on. The cerebral cortex produces thought 
by using energy in the form of photons; their interaction takes place on the quantum level, 
which means that every thought could be traced back to its source at a deeper level. There are 
no "spiritual" thoughts that stand apart on their own. But ordinary thinking doesn't cross the 
quantum frontier, even though it could (as Benson's nonspiritual technique shows). We are 
kept on the material level because we pay attention to what the thought means. Our attention 
is pulled outward rather than inward. 



A mantra, as well as Benson's neutral word one, has little or no meaning to distract us. 
Therefore it is an easier vehicle for going inward than prayer or verbal contemplation (in 
which one takes an aspect of God to think about and dwell on). 

There is no doubt that people resist the whole notion of God being an inner phenomenon. 
The vast majority of the world's faithful are firmly committed to stages one and two, believing 
in a God "up there," or at any rate outside ourselves. And the problem is complicated by the 
fact that going inward isn't a revelation; it is just a beginning. The quiet mind offers no sudden 
flashes of divine insight. Yet its importance is stated eloquently in the medieval document 
known as "The Cloud of Unknowing," written anonymously in the fourteenth century. The 
author tells us that God, the angels, and all the saints take greatest delight when a person 
begins to do inner work. However, none of this is apparent at first: 

For when you first begin, you find just a darkness and, as it were, a cloud of 
unknowing.... This darkness and this cloud, no matter what you do, stands between you 
and your God. 

The blockage takes two forms: one cannot see God with the mind's reason and 
understanding, nor can he be felt in "the sweetness of your affection." In other words, God has 
no presence emotionally or intellectually. The cloud of unknowing is all we have to go on. 

The only solution, the writer informs us, is perseverance. The inner work must continue. Then 
a subtle argument is made. The writer informs us that any thought in the mind separates us 
from God, because thought sheds light on its object. The focus of attention is like "the eye of 
an archer fixed on the spot he is shooting at." Even though the cloud of unknowing baffles us, 
it is actually closer to God than even a thought about God and his marvelous creation. We are 
advised to go into a "cloud of forgetting" about anything other than the silence of the inner 
world. 

For centuries this document has seemed utterly mystical, but it makes perfect sense once 
we realize that the restful awareness response, which contains no thoughts, is being 
advocated. The writer has delved deeply enough to find the God of stage three, who is beyond 
material considerations. The step he took was a brave one under the weight of priests, 
cathedrals, shrines, holy relics, church laws, and all the other material trappings of medieval 
religion, but it would be a brave step today as well, because we are still addicted to the 
outward life. People want a God they can see and touch and talk to. 

Consider how radical the argument really is, as revealed in the next section of the book: 

In this work it profits little or nothing to think upon the kindness or worthiness of God, 
or upon our Lady, or upon the saints and angels in heaven, or upon heavenly joy.... It is 
far better to think upon the naked being of God. 

This "naked being" is awareness without content, pure spirit, which naturally does not 
unfold itself in a few hours or days. As with any stage, this is one you enter, then explore. To 
someone who loves religion, it can be a bleak place at first, one marked by loss of all the 
rituals and comforts of organized faith. The value of stage three lies more in promise than in 
fulfillment, because it is a lonely road. The promise is given by our anonymous writer, who 
emphasizes over and over that delight and love will eventually arise out of silence. The inner 
work is done for only one purpose — to feel the love of God — and there is no other way to 
achieve it. 



What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is clarity, inner calm, and contact with the self. 
Evil is inner turmoil and chaos. 


The reader may have gotten this far and wondered how many people ever evolve to stage 
three. Looking around the world, one sees tremendous suffering and struggle. Even in a 
prosperous society the prevailing belief system usually promotes the value of work and 
achievement. "You never get something for nothing" and "God helps those who help 
themselves," as the sayings go. 

Every stage of inner growth is hard-won. There is no outside force that picks you up by the 
nape of the neck and drops you ahead on the journey. It is also true that outward 
circumstances do not determine anyone's belief system. I remember the widespread shock 
when Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn first arrived in America in the early 1970s when the Cold War 
was at its coldest. He was expected to praise the superiority of the West with all its individual 
freedoms, compared to the soulless repression he had left behind in Russia. Even though he 
had suffered terribly in the Gulag prison camps for eight years after writing a letter against 
Stalin, Solzhenitsyn shocked everyone when he denounced the spiritual emptiness of 
American consumerism, and subsequently he could only survive by retreating into the 
solitude of the New England woods, as ignored as Thoreau was when he did the same thing a 
hundred and fifty years earlier. 

This clash of values confronts everyone on the threshold of stage three. Good and evil are 
no longer measured by what happens outside oneself, the compass is turned inward. Good is 
measured by remaining centered in the self, which brings clarity and calm. Evil is measured 
by disturbance to that clarity; it brings confusion, chaos, and inability to see the truth. 

The inner life can never be a common experience. Fifty years ago the sociologist David 
Riesman noted that the vast majority are "outer directed" and the small minority "inner 
directed." Outer direction comes from what others think of you. If you are outer directed you 
crave approval and shrink from disapproval; you bend to the needs of conformity and easily 
absorb the prevailing opinions as your own. Inner direction is rooted in a stable self that can't 
be shaken; an inner-directed person is free of the need for approval; this detachment makes it 
much easier for him to question prevailing opinions. Being inner directed doesn't make you 
religious, but the religion of the inner directed is stage three. 

What is my life challenge? ... 

To be engaged and detached at the same time. 

Now we are in a better position to understand why Jesus wanted his disciples to be "in the 
world but not of it." He wanted them to be both detached and engaged — detached in the sense 
that no one could grab their souls, engaged in the sense that they remained motivated to lead a 
worthy life. This is the balancing act of stage three, and many people find it hard to manage. 

The writer of "The Cloud of Unknowing" says that going within is not the real dilemma, 
nor is rejection of society and its values. Here is how our writer describes spiritual work: 

See that you are in no way within yourself. And (to speak briefly) I do not want you to 

be outside yourself or above, or behind, or on one side, or on the other. 

This leaves only nowhere, and that is where the writer says we should be. God can't be 
contained in the mind; he is nothing compared to our myriad thoughts and ambitions. But 
there is a tremendous secret to this nothing and nowhere: 



Who is it that calls it nothing? Surely it is our outer man and not our inner. Our inner 

man calls it All; for it teaches him to understand all things bodily or spiritual, without 

any special knowledge of one thing in itself 

This is a remarkable description of how silence works. We aren't talking about the silence 
of an empty mind — in fact, those who achieve inner silence are also thinking in the ordinary 
way. But the thought takes place against a background of nonthought. Our writer equates it 
with knowing something that doesn't have to be studied. The mind is full of a kind of knowing 
that could speak to us about everything, yet it has no words; therefore we seek this 
knowingness in the background. At first nothing much seems to exist there; this is the phase 
of darkness and "the cloud of unknowing." But the hunt is on, and if you keep to your plan, 
rejecting outward answers over and over, never giving up on your belief that the hidden goal 
is real, eventually your seeking bears fruit. 

During this whole time, your work inside is private, but outer existence has to go on. Thus 
the balancing act Jesus referred to as being in the world but not of it. Or as we are stating it, 
being detached and engaged at the same time. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Autonomy. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

Fatalism. 

Having explained how the inner and outer life are meant to be balanced, the question 
arises, can it actually be done? In stage three a person finds that he is autonomous. By 
breaking free of social pressures, he can be himself. Yet there is the risk of fatalism, a feeling 
that being free is just a form of isolation with no hope of influencing others. How can another 
person, someone not at this stage, understand what it means? The whole thing sounds like a 
paradox, and once again the writer of "The Cloud of Unknowing" hits it right on the head. 

He points out that worldly people (and our own egos) aspire to be everywhere, while God 
is nowhere; they want to amount to something, yet God is nothing. The spiritually dedicated 
are thus consigned to the margins of society — the most extreme examples being monks and 
nuns. Renunciation is almost a requirement, because an inner God does not conform. 

Although every culture values its saints, the danger of turning inward, as far as society is 
concerned, is obvious. In 1918, long before anyone in England could foresee the importance 
of Gandhi to the fate of the British empire, the noted scholar Gilbert Murray made a prophetic 
statement: "Persons in power should be very careful of how they deal with a man who cares 
nothing for sensual pleasure, nothing for riches, nothing for comfort or praise or promotion, 
but is simply determined to do what he believes to be right. He is a dangerous and 
uncomfortable enemy, because his body, which you can always conquer, gives you so little 
purchase upon his soul." 

Purchase means something you can grab on to, and that is what's missing in stage three. 
Gandhi, because he had renounced the outer trappings, couldn't be grabbed anywhere in the 
usual places. Those in power couldn't threaten him with losing his job, house, family, or even 
with imprisonment and death (they tried all of these means anyway). I am not implying that 
stage three is as far as Gandhi got in his spiritual journey, but he illustrates the point: 
detachment renders the use of power impotent. The God of peace doesn’t validate how good 
you are by giving you money or status. You validate yourself from within, and this equates 
with God's blessing. At this stage of inner growth, the power of going inward is veiled; there 
is darkness and a cloud of unknowing. Yet somehow the pull toward spirit is real. For all the 



outer sacrifices, something seems to have been gained. What that something is becomes clear 
later; at this moment there is a period of adjustment as the person accommodates to a new 
world so different from that of every day. 

Wbat is my greatest temptation? ... 

Introversion. 

I've taken great pains to show that stage three is not about becoming an introvert. That is 
the great temptation, especially, for those who misinterpret the words going inward and inner 
silence. Words have a hard time at the quantum level. We are not talking about silence in the 
sense of no thought; we aren't talking about the inside of a person as opposed to the outside. 
But the ego has a fondness for co-opting anything spiritual and turning it to other purposes. 
Someone who by nature wants to shrink from the world can use as his excuse that spirituality 
should be inward. Someone who feels pessimistic in general can find comfort in rejecting the 
whole material world. 

Introversion is not a spiritual state, however. Behind it lie all kinds of negative 
assumptions about the value of external life. The introvert is hiding his light under a bushel 
basket, the very thing Jesus warns against. I know one man who describes himself as an 
internal defector. His basic attitude is disgust with the world. He thinks all politics are corrupt, 
all business greedy, all ambition futile, all personal attachments a trap. Needless to say, it can 
be very draining to be around this man, but he sees himself as a good, indeed almost model 
Buddhist. His path of renunciation — as he sees it — really amounts to rejection. The two are so 
close that it takes diligence not to mistake them. 

The telling difference is that rejection involves a great deal of ego. "I" make a decision that 
"they" (other people, the world in general) are unsuitable. The ego has many reasons for such 
rejection, and many sound plausible. To be involved in the world is a muddy, sometimes 
dispiriting business. On the other hand, the goal of spirituality is inclusive. God enfolds the 
whole creation, not just the nice parts. If you start out by rejecting this or that, how will you 
end up accepting it? Introversion rejects everything except those few acceptable bits of 
experience that make it through the gates set up by the ego. 

True renunciation is quite different. It consists of realizing that there is reality behind the 
mask of the material world. The "nothing and nowhere" of God are real, and in the face of 
that one's attention is pulled away from outer rewards. Thus the richest man in the world 
could be a renunciate, if he has the proper insights, while a greedy, selfish monk, no matter 
how cloistered he may be, could fall very short of renunciation. In the same way, someone 
can be extremely active and extroverted; this doesn't harm the inner search. The whole issue 
in stage three has to do with allegiance. Do you give your allegiance finally to the inner world 
or the outer? Many challenges come our way on this long journey, and no matter what answer 
you give verbally, it will be in the fire of experience that real answers come. 


STAGE FOUR: 
GOD THE REDEEMER 
(Intuitive Response) 


The brain knows how to be active and it knows how to be calm. Why isn't that the end of it? 
Where could the mind go once it has found peace within itself? The higher stages of 
spirituality seem mysterious when framed this way, because there is nowhere to go beyond 
silence. We have to look at what silence can grow into, which is wisdom. 



Psychologists are well aware that wisdom is a real phenomenon. If you pose a battery of 
problems to subjects who span a range of ages, the older ones will predictably give wiser 
answers than the younger. The posed problem could be anything: deciding on whether you've 
been cheated in a business deal, or how to settle an international incident that could lead to 
war. A wiser answer might be to wait and see before acting on impulse, to ask for advice from 
several sources, or not to take any assumptions for granted. It doesn’t matter really what the 
problem is. Wisdom is a perspective applied to any situation. 

Just as stage three sees the birth of a peaceful God, stage four sees the birth of a wise God. 
He is willing not to act on his vengeful impulses; he no longer holds old sins against us; his 
outlook has gotten beyond right- and wrongdoing. In the role of God the Redeemer, he begins 
to take back all the judgments that weighed down life; therefore his wisdom creates a sense of 
being loved and nurtured. In this way the loneliness of the inner world begins to soften. The 
qualities of God the Redeemer are all positive: 

Understanding 

Tolerant 

Forgiving 

Nonjudgmental 

Inclusive 

Accepting 

You will notice that none of these qualities is the result of thinking — if we found them in a 
person, we would call them qualities of character. The psychological version of wisdom is 
inadequate here. To a psychologist, wisdom is correlated with age and experience, but 
something much deeper is involved. Spiritual masters speak of a mysterious faculty known as 
"second attention." First attention is concerned with the task at hand, with the data being 
brought in by the five senses. It expresses itself as thoughts and feelings. Second attention is 
different. It looks beyond the task at hand, somehow viewing life from a deeper perspective. 
From this source wisdom is derived, and the God of stage four appears only when second 
attention has been cultivated. 

I know an ambitious writer who received a windfall from a book that had surprised 
everyone by becoming a best-seller. Elated with the influx of hundreds of thousands of 
dollars, he decided to venture it all in a risky oil leasing company. His friends pointed out that 
the vast majority of such opportunities bleed the investors dry before any oil is discovered. 
The writer was undeterred, and with no experience whatever, he plunged into his investment, 
going so far as to visit the proposed oil wells, which were dotted throughout Kansas. 

I met him again at a publishing event six months later. He sounded mournful; all his 
money had gone down the drain. "Everyone is being very kind about it," he said with 
embarrassment. "My friends resist their I-told-you-so impulses. But losing the money isn't 
really the hardest part, and it isn't the humiliation, either. What I have to live with is different. 
You see, from the very outset, I knew that this investment would fail. I hadn't the slightest 
doubt that I was making a terrible decision, and I walked through each day like a 
schizophrenic, totally confident on one level and totally doomed on the other." 

This is a dramatic example of the fact that we all inhabit more than one level of reality at 
the same time. First attention organizes the surface of life; second attention organizes the 
deeper levels. Intuition and wisdom both grow out of second attention and therefore cannot be 
compared to ordinary thinking. Yet this man didn't pay heed to his intuition; he went ahead 
with his doomed project, ignoring the unconscious part of himself that knew in advance what 
would happen. The God of stage four enters one's life only after you make friends with the 
subconscious. 



Therapists have an exercise for this, which consists of imagining yourself in a dark cave. 
You have entered to find the perfect mentor, who is waiting for you at the end of a tunnel. 

You begin to walk toward him, feeling calm and expectant — the cave is warm and safe. As 
you get near the end of the tunnel a room opens up, and you see your mentor with his back to 
you. He slowly turns around — this is the point at which you are supposed to realize who, out 
of everyone you have ever met, will be facing you. Whoever it turns out to be, whether your 
grandfather, a former teacher, or even a person you don't know, like Einstein or the Dalai 
Lama, you would expect certain qualities in your mentor: 

1 . A mentor should know who you are and what your aspirations are. God the Redeemer 
is understanding. 

2. A mentor should accept you faults and all. God the Redeemer is tolerant. 

3. When you bring up things that you have never told anyone because they make you feel 
guilty and ashamed, a mentor should absolve that guilt. God the Redeemer is 
forgiving. 

4. Wise as he is, a mentor should not interfere in your decisions or brand them wrong. 
God the Redeemer is nonjudgmental. 

5. A mentor should be able to understand a whole range of human nature. God the 
Redeemer is inclusive. 

6. You should feel safe with your mentor and bonded with him in intimacy. God the 
Redeemer is accepting. 

No gender is implied in the role of mentor (the original Mentor, who appeared as tutor and 
guide to the son of Ulysses, took a male shape but was actually Athena, goddess of wisdom). 
For the first time, in fact, we can say that the God of stage four has a bias toward the female. 
Intuition and the unconscious have generally been seen as feminine in contrast to the 
masculine power of reason. The same division is expressed biologically as right-brain versus 
left-brain dominance. The fact that the right brain oversees music, art, imagination, spatial 
perception, and perhaps intuition doesn't mean that the God of stage four lives there, although 
the implication is strong. Myths around the world include heroes who speak directly to gods, 
and some anthropologists have speculated that just as the right brain can bypass the left to 
receive nonverbal, nonrational insights, so ancient humans could bypass the claims of 
rationality and perceive gods, fairies, gnomes, angels, and other beings whose material 
existence is much doubted by the left brain. 

Today we are more inhibited. Very few people can say that they have talked with the 
Virgin Mary, while the rest of us have internalized divine voices as intuition. A gut feeling is 
as close to the oracle of Delphi as many people are going to get. That we can bypass reason to 
gain insight is certainly true. Intuition involves no cogitation or working through. Like 
lightning, it flashes across the mind, carrying with it a sense of rightness that defies 
explanation. 

I think the two hemispheres of the brain are likely to be the source of first and second 
attention, because "dominant" doesn't mean domineering. We can all intuit and reason at the 
same time. Doctors have all met patients who know in advance whether or not they have 
cancer, or whether a surgery will turn out well. In my early practice there was a woman who 
was fearful of her husband's life when he was on the verge of entering the hospital. As it 
happens, his surgery was minor and in no way threatened his life. 

"I know all that," she insisted, "but it's really his surgeon that worries me. I just don't have 
a good feeling about him." Everyone, including her husband and me, tried to reassure her. 
Doctor X was a prominent and skilled surgeon, yet the wife remained fretful. 



As it happens, there was a freakish occurrence. In the middle of his procedure her husband 
had a rare reaction to the anesthesia. He died on the table, unable to be revived. I was in 
shock; the wife was beyond consolation. She had known what would happen, and yet at the 
rational level, she had no basis for halting the surgery. This clash of first and second attention 
forms the central drama of stage four. The big question is how we can leam to trust second 
attention, since the unconscious has a reputation for being unreliable, if not dark and 
menacing. Once you start identifying with the knower — that part of yourself that is intuitive, 
wise, and perfectly at home in the quantum world — then God assumes a new shape. He turns 
from all-powerful to all-knowing. 


Who am I ? ... 

The knower within. 

You will never trust your intuition until you identify with it. Self-esteem enters here. At 
the earlier stages of inner growth, a person is esteemed who belongs to the group and upholds 
its values. If the knower within tries to object, he is stifled. Intuition actually becomes an 
enemy, because it has a nasty habit of saying things you aren't supposed to hear. A soldier 
sacrificing his life on the front lines can't afford to think about the barbarity of war and the 
rightness of pacifism. If his inner voice says, "What's the point? The enemy is just me in 
another man's skin," self-esteem gets tom to shreds. 

A person who has arrived at stage four long ago gave up group values. The enticements of 
war, competition, the stock market, fame, and wealth have faded. Being stranded in isolation 
is not a good fate, however, and so the knower within comes to the rescue. He provides a new 
source of self-esteem based upon things that cannot be known any other way. If you are 
thrilled by the following lines from the great Persian mystic Rumi, you definitely understand 
how the inner world can be more thrilling than anything outside: 

When I die 

I will soar with angels, 

And when I die to the angels, 

What I shall become 

You cannot imagine. 

In stage four the emptiness of outward life is rendered irrelevant because a new voyage has 
commenced. The wise are not sitting around contemplating how wise they are; they are flying 
through space and time, guided on a soul journey that nothing can impede. The hunger to be 
alone, characteristic of anyone in stage four, comes from sheer suspense. The person cannot 
wait to find out what comes next in the unfolding of the soul's drama. 

The word redemption conveys only a pale sense of how all-involving this whole 
expedition is. There is much more to the knower within than just being free from sin. 

Someone who still felt burdened with guilt and shame, however, would never embark on the 
voyage. You don't have to be perfect to try to reach the angels, but you do have to be able to 
live with yourself and keep your own company for long stretches of time. A sense of sin 
hinders that ability. As a somewhat cynical friend of mine, a psychiatrist, likes to say, "You 
will know a lot about human motivation once you realize one thing: ninety-nine percent of 
humanity spends ninety-nine percent of their time flying to avoid painful truths." 

Those who spend their time in other ways can seem mysterious. The knower within has 
little to do with the five senses; it doesn't care how rationality looks at a situation. The knower 
just knows. This mystery is the subject of a famous Zen parable: A young monk goes to his 



master, the abbot of the monastery, saying, "I must know the meaning of life. Will you tell it 
to me, sir?" 

The master, who was famed for his skill in calligraphy, picks up his brush and swiftly 
writes the word Attention on a piece of paper. The disciple waits, but nothing more happens. 
"Sir, I am determined to sit here until you tell me the meaning of life," he repeats. 

He sits down, and after a moment the master picks up his brush and again writes the word 
Attention on the paper. 

"I don't understand," the disciple protests. "It is said that you have attained the highest 
enlightenment. I am very eager to learn. Won't you tell me your secret?" But for the third time 
the master has nothing to say, only dipping his brush in the black ink and writing the word 
Attention. The young monk's impatience turns to discouragement. 

"So you have nothing to teach me?" he says mournfully. "If only I knew where to go. I 
have been seeking for so long." He gets up and leaves. The old master follows him with a 
compassionate look as he takes his brush and with a single stroke writes the word Attention. 

This little story loses its Zen-ness once you grasp that the master is talking about second 
attention. He can't answer the disciple's earnest questions because there are no answers at the 
level of first attention. The disciple could also have no idea of the excitement felt by the 
master, because from the outside there is no sign. We made the same point by observing that 
God leaves no traces in the material world. In stage four you find yourself fascinated with 
God, not because you need protection or comfort, but because you are a hunter after his 
quarry. The chase is all the more challenging when the prey leaves no tracks in the snow. 

How do I fit in? ... 

I understand. 

In stage three the inner world evidences little activity. Ships don't sail in a dead calm. They 
rest and wait. The inner world comes alive in stage four, where calmness and peace turn into 
something much more useful. One begins to understand how reality works, and human nature 
starts to unfold its secrets. Here are some examples: 

There are no victims. 

Everything is well ordered; things happen as they should. 

Random events are guided by a higher wisdom. 

Chaos is an illusion; there is total order to all events. 

Nothing happens without a reason. 

Let's call this a package of insight, centered on the question of why things turn out the way 
they do. It's a profound question. We all ask it, but we tend to ask in passing. Our passion is 
not to figure out the workings of fate. If some things seem preordained while others are 
accidental, so be it. In stage four, however, fate becomes a pressing issue. The person has 
experienced enough instances when "an invisible hand" must be at work. The instances may 
be small, but there is no turning away from them. 

Recently I fumbled on the computer and lost a large chunk of very important work. I could 
hardly sleep that night, and the only remedy was a piece of software that might rescue my lost 
chapters, if they could be rescued at all. It was agonizing waiting for overnight delivery, 
which of course wasn't on time. I picked up the phone and had dialed the express company 
when a neighbor knocked at the door. "I think this must be for you," he said, holding out the 
package, which he had noticed while walking across our yard. It had arrived at the wrong 
entrance to the house, an old sealed-off door, and the deliveryman hadn't been able to ring the 
bell since we don't have one back there. 



Besides getting to me just at the moment I was about to create a bit of chaos over the 
phone, the package was found by someone who had never unexpectedly dropped by before. 
How did all these ingredients, albeit tiny ones, happen to coincide? 

In stage four you will not rest easy until you understand the answer. After paying enough 
attention (always the key word) you begin to see that events form patterns; you see that they 
also hold lessons or messages or signs — the outer world somehow is trying to communicate — 
and then you see that these outer events are actually symbols for inner events. (In my case, the 
inner event was an angry tension that I wanted to be saved from.) The ripples flow out from 
the center, getting wider and wider, until you begin to see that the "invisible hand" has a mind 
behind it, as well as great wisdom in what it does. 

The conclusion of this little package of insight is that there are no victims. Wise people 
often say this, but when they declare that all is wisely and justly ordered, their listeners 
remain baffled. What about wars, fires, random murders, aircraft disasters, despotism, 
gangsters, and on and on? All of these imply victims and often cruel victimizers, too. How 
could the poet Browning have the audacity to claim that God is in his heaven and all's right 
with the world? He found out from God himself, but it was a God not to be met until stage 
four. 

Here is a good place to ask what the inner knower actually knows. As we commonly 
define it, knowledge is experience that has been recorded in memory. No one would know 
that water boils at 100 degrees Centigrade unless there was memory of this. So the wise must 
have much more experience than the rest of us, or else they were born with more brain 
capacity. But is that really the case? After a divorce a person may lament that as early as the 
honeymoon it was obvious that the marriage wouldn't work out. Yet somehow only hindsight 
shows the importance of that intuition. How much is reliable to begin with? 

Only the wise seem to know. Wisdom consists of being comfortable with certainty and 
uncertainty. In stage four life is spontaneous, yet it has a plan; events come as a surprise, yet 
they have an inexorable logic. Strangely, wisdom often arrives only after thinking is over. 
Instead of turning a situation over from every angle, one arrives at a point where simplicity 
dawns. In the presence of a wise person one can feel an interior calm, alive and breathing its 
own atmosphere, that needs no outside validation. The ups and downs of existence are all one. 
The New Testament calls this "the peace that passes understanding," because it goes beyond 
thinking — no amount of mental churning will get you there. 

How do I find God? ... 

Self-acceptance. 

The inner world has its storms, but much more terrible are its doubts. "Doubt is the dry rot 
of faith," as one Indian saint has said. No one can get very far in stage four if there is self- 
doubt, because the self is all there is to rely on. Outside support has lost its reassurance. In 
ordinary life, such a loss is dreaded. The outcast, the man without a country, and the traitor 
are roles no one wants to play. I have sat in a movie theater and heard dozens of people break 
into sobs when the Elephant Man is being hounded through a train station by a curious mob. 
His hideous head masked in a canvas bag, he is finally cornered and turns on his pursuers to 
cry in anguish, "I am not an animal, I am a human being!" 

This is our own unconscious speaking its deepest fear. There is an element of freakishness 
to all outsiders, because we define normality by being accepted. In stage four, however, all 
moorings are loosed. "I was once almost engaged to this woman," a friend who had spent 
some years in a monastic setting told me. "It was a long time ago, and I had no kind of 
experience in this area. One night we were sitting in the dark on the sofa. Her head was 



nestled on my chest, and I felt so close to her that I said, 'You know, as much as I love you, I 
think I love humanity just as much.' 

"She sat up with a horrified look on her face. 'Don't you realize that's the worst thing you 
can say to me?' she exclaimed. And I didn't. We broke up soon afterward, and yet I still don’t 
truly understand why she was so disturbed." 

Two worldviews had collided at that moment. To the woman, her lover’s words were a 
betrayal, because she looked to him for support; by choosing to love her instead of someone 
else, he made her more complete; he added to her identity with outside validation. The man 
felt the opposite — in his eyes, including humanity in his love made her greater. At bottom, he 
didn't understand the kind of support she needed. He wanted to experience a state where all 
love is included in one love. Such an aim is hard to achieve, and most people don't even see 
its value (not for themselves, at least — they might value it in Saint Francis or a bodhisattva). 
Since infancy we have all gained security from having one mother, one father, our own 
friends, one spouse, a family of our own; this sense of attachment reflects a lifelong need for 
support. 

In stage four the whole support structure melts away — the person is left to get support 
internally, from the self. Self-acceptance becomes the way to God. Not that an inner voice 
coos reassuring words, or that a new spiritual family is sought out. When Jesus says to his 
followers that they must die, he is referring to a state of inner detachment. It isn't a cold, 
heartless detachment but a kind of expansion that no longer needs to distinguish between me 
and you, yours and mine, what I want and what you want. Such dualities make perfect sense 
to the ego, yet in stage four the goal is to get beyond boundaries. If that involves giving up the 
old support systems, the person willingly pays the price. The soul journey is guided by an 
inner passion that demands its own fulfillment. 

What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is clarity, seeing the truth. 

Evil is blindness, denying the truth. 

From the outside someone in stage four seems to have opted out. With no social bonds left, 
there is really no social role, either. The band of misfits that gathers on the fringes of every 
culture is composed of madmen, seers, sages, psychics, poets, and visionaries. Which is which 
cannot be distinguished easily, and the fact that all seem to be getting a free ride irks many 
people. Socrates was condemned to death simply for being wise — the authorities called it 
"corrupting the city's youth" and following "novel religious beliefs" — and throughout history 
the same story has played out over and over. The deepest insights are usually not socially 
acceptable; therefore they are seen as insane, heretical, or criminal. 

In stage four good and evil are still contrasted, but with much less harshness than before. 
Good is clarity of mind, which brings the ability to see the truth. Evil is blindness or 
ignorance, which makes the truth impossible to see. In both cases we are speaking about self- 
centered qualities. The person accepts responsibility for defining "the truth" as he or she sees 
it. But that raises another accusation. What if the truth is simply whatever is convenient? 
Perhaps stealing a loaf of bread becomes right because "my truth" is that I am hungry. This 
sort of situational ethics isn't the real issue, however. In stage four the truth is much more 
elusive and even mystical. It contains a kind of spiritual purity difficult to define. When Jesus 
taught his followers that "the truth will set you free," he didn’t mean a certain set of facts or 
dogmas but revealed truth. In modern language we might come up with a different translation: 
seek the knower within, and it will set you free. 

In other words, the truth becomes a quest from which no one can deter you. Goodness 
means remaining true to your quest, evil is being drawn away from it. In the case of Socrates, 



even a sentence of death left him impervious. When offered an escape route across the sea if 
he would sneak out of Athens in the company of his friends, he refused. Their idea of evil — 
dying at the hands of a corrupt court — was not his. His evil would have been to betray 
himself. No one could comprehend why he wasn't afraid of death. Surrounded by tearful, 
frustrated pupils, he explained that death was an inevitable outcome. He was like a man who 
had calmly taken every step toward the edge of a cliff, knowing exactly where he was headed. 
Now that he had come to the jumping-off point, why should the last step cause any fear? This 
is really a perfect example of stage four reasoning. The quest has a purpose, and one sees it to 
the end. By drinking his cup of hemlock, Socrates died a traitor to the state who had upheld a 
total commitment to himself: this was a gesture of ultimate goodness. 

What is my life challenge? ... 

To go beyond duality. 

I have saved the topic of sin until we understood the inner world better. Sin is a stubborn 
issue. Because no one was perfect in childhood, we all carry the imprints of guilt and shame. 
Even in cultures that do not have a legend of the Fall, with its inheritance of original sin, guilt 
remains. The question is whether it is inherent. That is, did we do something to deserve 
feeling guilty, or is human nature created that way? 

Sin can be defined as a wrong that leaves an impression. Wrong deeds that you forget have 
no consequence, along with those that were inadvertent — leaving a pot boiling unattended that 
catches fire is accidental, not sinful. In the East any act that leaves an impression is called 
karma; this is a much broader definition than sin and it includes no moral blame. People often 
speak of bad karma, concentrating on the aspect of wrong; but in its purest form, karma can 
be right or wrong and still leave an imprint. 

The importance of this distinction becomes clear in stage four, because as right and wrong 
become less severe, the desire arises to be free of both. It would make little sense to have this 
aim before stage four. A tremendous amount of effort is expended in earlier stages trying to 
be good. God punishes those who aren't, and what he doesn't accomplish, a guilty conscience 
will. But the God of stage four, intent on redemption, sees sinners and saints in the same light, 
and all actions as equal. This valuation is scandalous. Society exists to draw the line between 
right and wrong, not to erase it. When Jesus associated with lepers and outcasts, when he 
neglected religious observances and pared the hundreds of Jewish laws down to two (put no 
other gods before God and love your neighbor as yourself), the good people around him 
assumed he was either crazy or criminal. 

In actuality, he was extremely responsible. In one phrase — "As you sow, so shall you 
reap" — Jesus stated the law of karma quite succinctly. He had no intention of getting away 
with wrongdoing but instead pointed to a higher spiritual rule: your actions today define your 
future tomorrow. Regardless of whether an act is deemed good or bad, this higher rule can't be 
sidestepped. Those who think it can have not looked deep enough. By stage four there is 
enough insight to realize that all past actions have a way of coming home to roost. This 
dynamic turns out to be more important than identifying sin. 

What, then, would forgiveness of sin amount to? How do you redeem your soul? Finding 
the answer is the life challenge of this stage. A redeemed soul sees itself as new and 
unblemished. To reach this state of innocence would be impossible according to the law of 
karma, for the cycle of sowing and reaping never ends. (Unlike sin, karma grips us even in the 
case of accidents and inadvertent mistakes — regardless of circumstances, an action is an 
action and has consequences.) 

The problem is further complicated by the fact that each person performs millions of 
actions in a lifetime, and these overlap on all levels. Emotions and intentions are both tied in. 



Is a man virtuous who gives money to the poor out of a selfish desire to save his soul? Is it 
right to marry a woman who is carrying your baby even if you don't love her? The parsing of 
good from bad becomes extremely complicated, and the doctrine of karma makes the 
calculation harder rather than easier, because the mind can always find some tiny detail that 
was overlooked previously. 

It can take a lifetime to solve this riddle, but in theory at least the answer is simple: you 
redeem your soul by turning to God. A redemptive God is the only being in the cosmos 
exempt from karma (or sin). Or to be more accurate, God transcends karma because he alone 
isn't in the cosmos. A person in stage four has no interest in praying for a miraculous delivery 
from all his past evils; what he wants is a way to get outside the cosmos as well. In other 
words, he wants the rule of "As you sow, so shall you reap" repealed. 

How can that possibly happen? Clearly no one can repeal the law of cause and effect. In 
the East, using the terminology of karma, they say that evil acts pursue a soul across time and 
space until the debt is paid. Even death cannot abolish a karmic debt; this only happens by 
becoming a victim of the same evil you committed or by working off bad imprints through 
good ones. 

At the level of second attention, however, this cycle is irrelevant. One doesn't need to 
repeal the law of karma at all. Despite all the activity on the surface of life, a speck of 
awareness inside is not touched. The instant they wake up in the morning, a saint and a sinner 
are in the same place. They both feel themselves to be alive and aware. This place stands 
outside reward and punishment. It knows no duality; therefore in stage four your challenge is 
to find this place, hold on to it, and live there. When you have accomplished this task, duality 
is gone. You are free from all bondage of good or bad actions. In Christian terms, your soul is 
redeemed and returned to innocence. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Insight. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

Delusion. 

I said earlier that in stage four all the moorings are cut loose. Now we know why. The 
inner quest is all about undoing attachments. These do not come free all at once, nor is every 
attachment equal. It is entirely normal to arrive at profound insights about yourself and still 
feel as ashamed or guilty as a little child over certain things. The soul is like a ragged army on 
the march. Some aspects push ahead; others lag behind. 

The reason for this is again karmic: not all our past actions leave equal imprints. Some 
people are haunted for life by incidents from their past that are seemingly small. I know a man 
who has had to fire hundreds of employees, reorganize businesses that eventually went under, 
and in various ways decide the fate of many people. His decisions caused grief and 
complaints every time, no matter how well intentioned they were. He sleeps undisturbed by 
any of that, while in his heart of hearts he cannot forgive himself for not being at his mother's 
bedside when she died. The thought of having left so much unsaid makes him guilty every 
day. He knows at some level that his love for his mother is felt by her, but that doesn't heal the 
guilty wound. 

Because of its intense subjectivity, stage four requires new tactics. No one outside yourself 
can offer absolution. To get past an obstacle requires your own insight; if you can't get past it, 
you keep fighting off delusion until you do. In this man's case, his delusion is that he is bad 
for not being with his mother (he had in fact no choice, since his trip home was delayed 
beyond his control); the insight is that his genuine love doesn’t have to have an outward show. 



But beyond these particulars, there is only one insight and one delusion in stage four. The 
insight is that everything is all right; the delusion is that we have made unforgivable mistakes. 
The reason that everything is all right goes back to redemption; in the eyes of God, all souls 
are innocent. The same reason tells us that we are deluded to keep holding on to past 
mistakes. They cannot blemish our souls, and their residual effect, in terms of guilt, shame, 
and payback, will be washed away in good time. 

What is my greatest temptation? ... 

Deception. 

This is meant both in terms of self-deception and deceiving others. Every stage of inner 
growth contains more freedom than the one before. Breaking free from sin is a great 
accomplishment in stage four, but the price of redemption is constant vigilance. It is hard to 
keep examining yourself all of the time. A voice inside often urges you to be easier on 
yourself, take things as they are, act the way everyone else does. To follow this advice would 
make existence much more pleasant. Socrates could have apologized for offending the morals 
of Athens; he could have preached the accepted wisdom instead of his own. But to fall into 
this easy way amounts to deception, because the inner march of wisdom cannot be stopped. 
(Plato put it eloquently: "Once lit, the flame of truth will never go out.") Unless you are 
willing to deceive yourself into believing otherwise, a person in stage four really is free of 
outside values. 

How long this temptation lasts varies with each person. In myth one is redeemed instantly 
by a merciful God when in fact it is a long process with many turnings. "I think my soul is 
like one of those squirrels in the park," someone once remarked to me. "When you try to feed 
a squirrel, he won't take the peanut from your hand in one go. He darts toward you, then he 
loses his nerve and darts away. The slightest gesture scares him off, and only after a few feints 
will he get up the nerve to reach out for what he wants." The parallel is exact. At some level 
everyone wants to be rid of guilt. As Rumi says in one aphorism, "Outside all notions of right 
and wrong there is a field — will you meet me there?" However much you want to, it isn’t 
possible to dash toward this place. Our old imprints are very strong; guilt and shame arise as a 
reminder that it takes more than an act of will to escape notions of right and wrong. The 
process has to continue without deception. You can't fool your sense of being imperfect or 
sinful — choose your terms — in the hope that the slate can be wiped clean once and for all. 
There is a lot of work to do in the form of meditation, self-reflection, taking responsibility. 
You have to act on the truth as it occurs to you. Every step forward must be tested, and the 
temptation to go backward persists until the very end. Whatever is involved in total self- 
acceptance has to be met. The triumph of stage four turns out to be a paradox in the end. At 
the very point when you see that you are all right, that you need never worry about good and 
evil again, the realization dawns that you never did wrong to begin with. Redemption returns 
the soul to a sense of innocence that never actually went away. Or to put it more simply, the 
whole process of being true to yourself brings as its reward a higher level of awareness. At 
this level, the issues of duality have been left behind, and when that happens, the subjective 
feeling is one of being redeemed. 


STAGE FIVE: 
GOD THE CREATOR 
(Creative Response) 



There is a level of creativity that goes far beyond anything we have discussed so far. It dawns 
when intuition becomes so powerful it must break out into the environment. This "super- 
intuition" controls events and makes wishes come true, as though an artist is working not in 
paint and canvas but in the raw material of life. The following example from my own life 
began in mundane circumstances that grew more and more amazing: 

Some months ago I was in my office looking over a project that needed some cover art, but 
I knew no professional illustrators. As soon as I had the thought "I wonder whom I can find?" 
the phone rang. It was my grown daughter, Mallika, calling from India, and when I mentioned 
my problem, she immediately suggested an Irish artist named Suzanne Malcolm (not her real 
name). Neither of us had any idea where she lived. I hung up and thought nothing more about 
it, until that afternoon when a publisher friend called from London. On the off chance, I asked 
if he knew Suzanne Malcolm, but he didn't. An hour later he found himself at a cocktail party 
when the person next to him got a call on his cellular phone. He put it to his ear and said, 
"Suzanne?" 

My publisher friend gave in to a sudden impulse. "Could that possibly be Suzanne 
Malcolm you're talking to?" he asked. Astonishingly, it was. My friend took down her 
telephone number and also asked her to call me. By this time — we are still on the same day — 
I had flown to Los Angeles for a scheduled lecture. I was early, however, so I pulled my 
rental car over to the curb; I had no idea exactly where I was. Checking my messages on the 
cell phone, I found one from Suzanne Malcolm. This was good news, and I dialed the number 
she had left me. 

"Hello?" a woman's voice answered. 

"Suzanne," I said, introducing myself, "I was wondering whether you could fly over from 
Dublin. I think I have an art assignment for you." 

"Well, actually, I'm not in Ireland at the moment. I'm in Los Angeles." 

"Really? Where are you staying?" I asked. 

"I'm not sure," she replied. "Oh yes, it's 3312 Dominic." I looked outside the car window 
and felt a shudder pass through me — I was parked directly in front of her house. 

How unwittingly we fall into God's reach. This example clearly goes beyond intuition, 
because no one involved in the story had any. It amounts to more than synchronicity, since 
this wasn't just a chance encounter that turned out to be significant. What can we call it when 
a string of events begins with a faint intention, only to be orchestrated across two continents, 
several time zones, and the random lives of four people? 

The answer is creativity. The mind field, being beyond time and space, can manipulate 
them for its own use. Usually its workings are not exposed to view. We don't observe how the 
wheels of fate turn — until stage five, that is. Now the time has come when fate no longer has 
to be hidden from view. This happens when a person gives up all notions of accident, 
coincidence, and random events, and instead claims responsibility for each and every incident, 
however trivial. Events no longer happen "out there" but are guided by one's own intentions. 
Stage five joins the individual to God in a partnership as co-creators. When you are ready to 
form this alliance, the God you meet has these qualities: 

Unlimited creative potential 

Control over space and time 

Abundant 

Open 

Generous 

Willing to be kn own 

Inspired 



This is the most intimate God we have projected so far, because of a quality that is the key to 
stage five: openness. God the Creator is willing to share his power with his creation. His 
abundance and generosity follow from his openness. The Creator is much vaster than any 
previous God, and our minds have to grasp just what it means to have all of time and space at 
our disposal. 

When Adam and Eve ate the forbidden fruit, it immediately created a sense of shame in 
them. This first moment of self-consciousness caused them to hide from God, and to some 
extent we have been hiding ever since. In other words, the conviction of sin has deprived us of 
our own creativity, which could parallel if not equal God’s. Getting back to the source has 
been a constant theme ever since the first stage. In stage five, at long last, there is no trace of 
original sin, no imperfection to atone for. 

To return to my first example, the fact that I found my illustrator doesn't mean that I 
arrived at stage five. The crucial question is over the role I played. If I see myself outside the 
process, then I am not a co-creator. Lazarus, after being raised from the dead, was incredibly 
astonished, but he didn't raise anyone himself, nor did he claim to be his own miracle worker. 
To be in alliance with God, you must uphold your side of the partnership, which involves 
some very specific beliefs: 

You have to see yourself at the center of the creative process. 

You have to accept responsibility for all outcomes. 

You have to recognize that all thoughts have consequences, even the most minor. 

You have to identify with a larger self than the one living here and now in this 

limited physical body. 

Many people on the spiritual path willingly accept one or more of these beliefs, but the 
deciding factor is whether you live them out. One prerequisite is years of meditation, 
contemplation, or prayer; another is doing a great deal of inner work to remove self-doubt and 
beliefs about one's imperfection. Above all, this is a stage of power, and that implies getting 
straight about whether you deserve to wield it. People in stage five are usually inward and 
private, but they all know that their intentions count. Things happen because they want them 
to, no matter whether the results feel good or bad and irrespective of whether or not they bring 
any obvious benefit. Behind their screen of privacy, these people are not necessarily grand, 
rich, or famous. They are overjoyed, however, by knowing that God is sharing his creative 
genius with them. 

Brain research sheds little light on what mechanism is involved here. It is surmised that 
when people are in a creative state, the cerebral cortex first establishes restful awareness. 
Creativity exhibits the alpha rhythms of relaxation; subjectively the person feels open and 
receptive. Unlike other periods of relaxation, this state is on the lookout for something — a 
stroke of inspiration — and when it occurs a spike of activity is registered by the mind as a 
moment of "Eureka!" Famous artists and inventors all testify to this experience, and in their 
work it can have profound implications. A eureka isn't ordinary thinking. Truly creative 
people tend to introduce a question into their minds and then wait for the solution to arrive — 
hence the necessity of going into a relaxed mode. 

What is the brain doing for those hours or days before the creative solution appears? We 
have no idea. While incubating a great theoretical breakthrough, Einstein's brain exhibits the 
same mundane activity as anyone else's. 

Yet it is undeniable that the mind is doing something highly unusual, particularly if we 
extend creativity beyond what an Einstein or Michelangelo does. If creativity means carving 
your own destiny out of space-time, it would be fruitless to look for evidence on the material 
level. We are speaking of quantum creativity here. For quite a while I have put aside our 



quantum model because I wanted to portray God from a more human, personal standpoint. As 
soon as we start approaching the miraculous, however, the quantum world has to return; there 
is no other viable way to explain such powers. 

"There are no miracles," an Indian master once remarked, "unless you look at all of life as 
a miracle." He meant something quite specific here. The world seems to be a given, not the 
product of a miracle, whereas turning water into wine seems absolutely miraculous. The two 
fuse, however, at the quantum level. If I look outside my window I can see an old gnarled oak 
standing between myself and the ocean. Is that tree simply there, a given object in the 
landscape? Not at all. To a neutrino, which can pass through the entire earth in a few 
millionths of a second, solid objects are as vaporous as fog. My nervous system must create 
an oak tree from the fog of quantum data. Everything about that tree is malleable. To a proton, 
which takes billions of years to be bom and then decay, the life of an old oak is less than a 
split second. To a mayfly, with its life span of one day, the oak tree is literally eternal. To a 
Druid priest, the tree would be sacred, the home of forest deities, and therefore a tremendous 
source of power. To a logger it is just a day's work. 

Take any quality the tree might have, and it changes according to the perceiver. Now 
consider the environment of the tree. Every quality possessed by the air, the sea, the earth, and 
the sun are equally under my control. In a catatonic state, I would see nothing that I see now. 
In a state of religious inspiration, colors, smells, and sounds might be acutely sharp. This is 
more than a subjective shift. To perceive the world, my brain must convert virtual photons 
into sensory information. 

Having covered this area already, I will just emphasize the most important point: there is 
no tree "out there. " No sights, sounds, textures, tastes, or smells exist without a brain to create 
them. We are so accustomed to accepting the world as a given that we overlook our creative 
role in it, but one can imagine a sightless world — it is the one that blind cave fish inhabit. 
Since their environment contains no photons of visible light, eyes aren't needed. This isn't a 
loss to them; it is just a choice not taken. Likewise, when one person is able to create 
outcomes in his life while another person merely experiences random events, the difference is 
a choice not taken. 

So many of us limit our choices that we look upon higher creativity as miraculous, but it 
isn't. In your mind's eye, see a scene from your childhood. Most people can do this easily, 
putting themselves back at the beach with their families, for example. With a vivid enough 
imagination, you can even get absorbed in the scene, feeling the sun's heat and brightness, 
letting the surf surge over your body. There is no essential difference between doing this in 
your mind and actually going to the beach in person. In both cases the brain is shaping virtual 
photons into a pattern of experience. When Jesus turned water into wine, he used the same 
ability, only he obliterated the arbitrary line between imaginary results and real ones. 

In stage five a person flirts with crossing that line. This is not yet the phase for complete 
miracles like levitation or raising the dead. Here one takes the role of apprentice, willing to 
peer into the master's box of secrets yet not quite a master oneself. In other words, there is still 
a small separation between the individual mind and its source at the virtual level. Imagining 
yourself in stage five is much like being the most privileged pupil of Mozart or Leonardo da 
Vinci. To be accepted as an artist in the master's eyes, the following relationship would have 
to develop: 

1 . You need to trust that your teacher really is a great master. God the Creator has 
unlimited creative potential. 

2. You expect the master to be able to work confidently in his chosen medium. God the 
Creator uses the medium of reality itself: he controls time and space. 



3. You want your master to have a great deal to teach. God the Creator is abundant and 
generous. 

4. The master shouldn't be so lost in himself that he isn’t approachable. God the Creator 
is open. 

5. You don't want the master to hold back his real knowledge. God the Creator is willing 
to be known. 

6. You want the master to transcend mechanical ability and tap into the source of genius. 
God the Creator is inspired. 

At earlier stages of inner growth, it would seem blasphemous, or at the very least 
impudent, to undertake this kind of relationship. Earlier stages did not desire or permit such 
intimacy. But by stage five, a person realizes that God is not a being with desires. Since he 
has no preferences, everything is permitted. The inhibitions that hold us back — and this holds 
true at every level of growth — exist inside ourselves. Because he is infinite and therefore all- 
inclusive, God sees all choices with the same eye — his vision includes no judgment. When a 
person realizes this, God suddenly opens his deepest secrets, not because God changed his 
mind but because our perspective has. 


Who am I? ... 

God's co-creator. 

The master-apprentice metaphor stretches only so far. God is never to be met in person, 
and he doesn't announce what he has to teach. The entire process is internal. As a co-creator, 
however, you are expected to do more than just live and have random desires, as most people 
do. A co-creator takes a certain orientation toward his desires. This doesn't mean controlling 
or manipulating what you wish for. Those are choices made at the ego level. In stage five, the 
process is about becoming the author of your own life; some have called it writing your 
destiny script. How is that done? 

First of all, one has to see the difference between before and after. Before you become the 
author of your own life, you feel inadequate and powerless. Unforeseen things happen all the 
time. Every day presents some kind of obstacle, large or small. Indeed there may be massive 
confusion about what you want in the first place. If you are operating from a place of conflict 
and confusion, outside circumstances seem to have the upper hand. 

By contrast, after you assume authorship of your own life, outcomes are never in doubt. 

No matter what happens to you, each event has a place and a meaning. You see that your 
spiritual journey makes sense, even down to the smallest details. It isn't that your ego wakes 
up every morning and arranges your day. Events still unfold unpredictably, yet at the moment 
they occur, you know that you are adequate to meet them. No question arises that doesn't have 
its own answer somewhere inside it. The adventure is to uncover the creative solutions that 
most appeal to you. Like an author who can make any world he chooses on the page, you gain 
authorship based on your own inclinations, with no outside help and no second opinions. 

Stage five isn’t the last phase, since we haven't crossed the line into miracles. You can tell 
if you are in stage five by the way you get what you want. If you rely almost entirely on an 
internal process, then you are, with a minimum of effort, a co-creator of reality. 

How do I fit in? ... 

I intend. 

If we get down to specifics, the act of creation is reducible to one ingredient: intention. In 
stage five you don't have to master esoteric techniques; there are no magic tricks to making a 



thought come true, no secrets of miracle-working. You just intend a thing and it happens. 
When highly successful people are interviewed, many times they repeat the same formula: "I 
had a dream and I stuck with it, because I was certain that it would come true." This attitude is 
a symptom — one might say the symptom — of co-creation. Of course, there is a great deal of 
work to be done to arrive at any great accomplishment, but in stage five the end result is 
preordained, and therefore the work itself isn't primary. It's just what you need to do to get to 
the goal. In fact, many famous achievers testify that the astonishing events of their careers 
seemed to be happening on automatic, or as if to someone else standing outside themselves. 
Whatever it feels like, intention lies at the heart of the process. 

To break this down into specific behavior, the following qualities can be seen in people 
who have mastered the art of intention: 

1 . They are not attached to the past or how things should turn out. 

2. They adapt quickly to errors and mistakes. 

3. They have good antennae and are alert to tiny signals. 

4. They have a good connection between mind and body. 

5. They have no trouble embracing uncertainty and ambiguity. 

6. They remain patient about the outcome to their desires, trusting the universe to bring 
results. 

7. They make karmic connections and are able to see the meaning in chance events. 

These qualities also answer the earlier question of what good comes from inner silence. 

The good is creative. In these seven qualities some huge life lessons are embedded. One could 
write a book about this list alone, but here is a brief synopsis: Making any idea come to life 
always involves intention. If you have a flash of genius, that flash remains inside your head 
until it materializes. So the important issue is how it gets materialized. There are efficient 
ways and inefficient ways. The most efficient way is shown to us by the mind itself. If I ask 
you to think of an elephant, the image just appears in your head, and even though millions of 
neurons had to coordinate this image, using chemical and electromagnetic energy, you remain 
aloof from that. As far as you are concerned, the intention and the outcome are one; all 
intervening steps remain invisible. 

Now consider a larger intention, such as the intention to go to medical school. Between 
having this idea initially and fulfilling it are many steps, and these are not internal at all: 
raising tuition money, passing exams, gaining admission, etc. Yet, just like the image of the 
elephant, each of these steps depends upon brain operations being invisibly coordinated. You 
think, move, and act using intention. In stage five this automatic pilot is extended to the outer 
world. That is, you expect the entire process of becoming a doctor to unfold with the least 
effort, unhindered by obstacles. The boundary between "in here" and "out there" is softened. 
All events take place in the mind field first and then exhibit their outward manifestation. 

Having realized this fact, your behavior is now free to follow the seven principles outlined 
in our list. You can be detached from how things are going to work out because you have left 
it to the cosmos. Past success and failure don't matter since each intention is computed afresh, 
without regard for old conditioning. You are able to be patient about each step, given that 
timing is worked out perfectly on another level. Over the months and years of getting to be a 
doctor, you remain a silent witness as pieces of the process fall into place. Even as you go 
through action, the "doing" of it remains impersonal. On the ego level you may feel 
disappointment that event A occurred instead of event B, which you expected, but at a deeper 
level you know that B happened for a better reason. When that reason reveals itself, you make 
the karmic connection. Since no one is perfect, you will still make mistakes, but you adapt to 



these quickly; there is no need for stubbornness since after all you are not in charge of how 
things work out — your chief responsibility was to have the intention in the first place. 

(Skeptics might wonder what prevents you from intending the perfect murder or embezzling a 
million dollars, but the universe tends to support what is best for you, not just what your 
whims dictate.) 

Finally, as any intention unfolds, you aren't just passively riding along like a passenger on 
a train. Your role is to remain as sensitive and alert as possible. The turning points in life 
arrive as small signals at first; these only amplify when you choose to follow them. So being 
vigilant about tiny clues is a major part of spiritual evolution. God always speaks in silence, 
but sometimes the silence is louder than at other times. 

How do I find God? ... 

Inspiration. 

I often hear people quote Joseph Campbell's advice to "follow your bliss." But how exactly 
is this done? I might get bliss from eating chocolate cake, but if I follow that, the results 
would be uncomfortable after a while; greedy, selfish, abusive, controlling, and addicted 
people could mistakenly believe that they are following their bliss, too. In stage five bliss 
becomes better defined as inspiration. Rather than having intentions that originate with your 
ego, you feel that you are called to do something highly meaningful. Self-gratification is still 
intense, but it is no longer narrow (in the way that having an orgasm or eating in a great 
restaurant is). The sense of being outside yourself is often present and, as God takes over, the 
fruition of your desires feels blissful — whereas the fulfillment of ego desires often surprises 
us by feeling very flat: ask anyone how they feel six months after winning the lottery. 

To be inspired is a high state of attainment. Four decades ago, the psychologist Abraham 
Maslow first spoke of peak experiences , his terminology for a breakthrough into expanded 
consciousness. A peak experience shares many qualities with inspiration, including feelings of 
bliss and being outside oneself. Peak experiences have been reported atop Mount Everest, but 
they also might arrive in the ecstasy of music making, falling in love, or winning an important 
victory. The conscious mind receives a supercharged burst from the unconscious, and even 
though this may happen only once in a lifetime, that feeling of empowerment can influence 
the course of events for many years. 

By contrast, ever since Freud uncovered the basis of neurosis, psychology has insisted that 
human nature is freighted with violence and repression. The unconscious was not a region 
close to God but a dark, murky terrain. Our worst instincts thus became normalized, overlaid 
with better instincts such as love and peacefulness, but never to be escaped. Maslow felt 
differently, that it was not normal to be violent or evil in any way. 

Although Maslow theorized that peak experiences gave glimpses of the real norms of the 
psyche, it was nearly impossible to prove that anyone lived at a peak for any length of time. 
Out of the whole population, Maslow and like-minded researchers could barely find 5 percent 
who even temporarily made such a transition. When they did, remarkable things happened. 
Such individuals felt as a normal experience that they were safe, confident, full of esteem for 
themselves and others, deeply appreciative of what life brought to them, and constantly in a 
state of wonder that the world could remain so fresh and alive every day, year in and year out. 

This handful of people were labeled "self-actualized" and then more or less forgotten. The 
norm did not get redefined. This wasn't a failure of insight. To redefine human nature in such 
positive terms seemed unrealistic. Freud had already laid down as law that human nature 
contains hidden tendencies that break out like caged monsters to overwhelm us but are always 
present beneath the surface. 



Maslow himself, believing with all his heart that human nature is trustworthy and capable 
of great inner growth, had to admit that tremendous obstacles stand in our way. Most people 
are too needy to grow, because as long as our needs are frustrated, we spend most of our time 
being driven to fulfill them. Need comes in four levels, Maslow said: the first is physical, the 
need to feed and clothe ourselves; next comes the need for safety, followed by the need to be 
loved, and finally by the need for self-esteem. A huge amount of inner work is devoted to 
these basic requirements of life. Maslow taught that needs are stacked up, one above the 
other, into a hierarchy. Only at the top of the pyramid does a person get the chance to feel 
self-actualized. 

By this measure most of spiritual life is wishful thinking. When someone turns to God in 
order to feel safe or to be loved, need is the real motivation. In any event, God doesn't 
intervene to rectify the situation. To be driven by need is just how life works. To bring back 
the sacred, it must accomplish something that love, security, self-esteem, or good fortune 
cannot. This is where inspiration comes in, because when we are inspired, we don't act from 
need at all. Inspiration, as the Bible says, is an act of grace, a blessing. 

In stage five this sense of being blessed begins to spread beyond a particular moment. You 
don't have to be spiritually advanced to feel triumphant when you reach the top of Everest or 
win the Nobel Prize. Spiritual advancement shows up when the small things cany a share of 
blessing, too. As Walt Whitman wrote, "A morning glory at my window satisfies me more 
than the metaphysics of books." (This is a poet who scandalized his readers by declaring that 
the smell of his armpits was more holy than any church.) Someone in stage five sees grace in 
all things. 


What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is higher consciousness. 

Evil is lower consciousness. 

"For me, a new phase began in a very trivial way," a woman once told me. "I was in a 
hotel room sitting next to the window. My plans for the day had been mined by heavy rains 
that had moved in overnight, and I was a little glum. Down the block I could see a skyscraper 
looming up, when all at once I thought, 'It would be nice to see a patch of sun on that 
building. I've probably never had a more trivial idea in my life. 

"All at once, in the midst of a downpour, the clouds parted, and a brilliant shaft of sunlight 
landed right where I was looking. It paused for a moment, as if to say, 'Okay, do you get it?' 
and then the gray closed back in. I wasn't shaken; oddly enough I wasn't even surprised, but 
that tiny incident had a huge impact on me. I began to believe that my thoughts were 
connected to outer reality." 

Once attained, this connection becomes the most valuable thing in a person's existence, 
and losing it becomes one's worst fear. In stage five the fall from grace becomes a personal 
threat. Is such a fear groundless? Yes and no. It is inevitable that no one in stage five can 
make every wish come true, and bad things, in terms of pain and failure, continue to occur. 
This stokes the fear. Many people who have attained tremendous success find themselves 
spinning out of control, losing their center and no longer relying on the inner assurance that is 
needed at every level of awareness. Outward pressures are sometimes to blame, or inner 
demons may rise to the surface. In any case, stage five is not a magic haven. 

On the other hand, these setbacks are only temporary. The ego has forgotten that a learning 
process is involved. When things don't go right, failure is not the issue, much less evil. Being 
a co-creator implies complete mastery, and during apprenticeship that hasn't yet been attained. 
We don't live in a society that gives credibility to what has been discussed here. Despite all 
the cliches about making your dreams come true, no one is really taught that success depends 



on your state of consciousness. Gurus and masters are scarce; the legacy of wisdom has been 
shelved in books. This means that almost anyone who strives spiritually must become his own 
guide. Even God, who is the real guide, becomes known as an aspect of the self. In this 
context, falling to a lower state of consciousness is felt as a real and present danger, for you 
risk losing the only relationship that ultimately matters, that between you and yourself. In 
reality this can never happen, but the shadow of evil still lurks over stage five. 

Maslow argued that the whole problem of evil boils down to needs that persist in 
unconscious form from our past. Nazi Germany was a country devastated by war and 
economic turmoil in the 1920s. We know from the biographies of Hitler and Stalin that they 
were abused as children, denied love. Eventually these frustrated needs took the form of 
cruelty, paranoia, and oppression. Common unhappiness comes from lower needs being 
unmet; evil comes from all being unmet. 

Stage five amplifies our power so much that misusing it would amount to evil. Leaders 
who have a hypnotic hold over their followers go beyond ordinary persuasion. They have hit 
upon a source of power that crosses the boundaries of identity; in some way the leader 
actually infiltrates the "I" of his listener. Anyone who has entered stage five deeply fears 
having that kind of influence, for it amounts to letting one's own unconscious desires take 
over. Clarity is lost in the intoxication of power, without the person realizing that a destructive 
child is playing with the controls of the mind. The evil that results can be traced back to a 
lower level of awareness, exactly the thing most feared. 

What is my life challenge? ... 

To align with the Creator. 

There is more than one way to arrive at any goal, and not all are sacred. Jesus was born 
into a world of magicians and miracles. He by no means invented all the powers that can 
accomplish things beyond the five senses. In those episodes where he drives out demons or 
defeats the sorcerer known as Simon Magus, Jesus draws a line between God's way and other 
ways. Magic is not seen as holy. 

In the late nineteenth century a famous English performer named Daniel Dunglas Home 
developed the amazing ability to walk on air. He could, for example, exit out through a tall 
window seventy feet off the ground and come back in through the adjoining one. Home 
performed this feat widely and did not charge or accept fees. Later in life he converted to 
Catholicism, but was excommunicated when he revealed that he had accomplished his air 
walk with the aid of "discarnate spirits" using him as their medium. 

I offer this anecdote at face value, without comment about how Home accomplished what 
he did (no definitive debunking was ever done, although skeptics point out that he usually 
insisted on performing in dimly lit rooms). For ages the distinction between holy and unholy 
power has been made. Is it valid? If God is all-encompassing, does he care how any power is 
attained? 

I would say that the question has to be reframed. If we assume that our quantum model 
holds good, then nothing is unholy. Beyond right and wrong, the Creator may permit us to 
explore anything he himself has allowed to exist. 

Yet it wouldn't be good to attain any level of consciousness that does not bring benefit to 
yourself, and since you do not know how your soul's journey has been mapped out, deciding 
what is good or bad for you shouldn't be left to your ego. The ego always wants to accumulate 
and acquire; it wants to be safe; it hates uncertainty. Yet on the road of evolution there are 
periods of great uncertainty and even lack of safety. Therefore the challenge is to align with a 
higher intention for yourself — God's will. 



In stage five, although one may be able to make almost any wish come true, the ones that 
should come true matter more. Here we are guided to increase bliss, love, charity to others, 
and peaceful existence on the planet. An inner sense of rightness must be cultivated; an inner 
sense of ego must be diminished. Power never arrives in a vacuum. The larger will that rules 
events always tries to make itself known. If you align with it, the path through this phase is 
smooth; if you don't, there are many ups and downs, and your ability to manifest your desires 
can run into as many obstacles as it overcomes. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Imagination. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

Self-importance. 

Artists who create with paint or music start with a blank canvas or page; they go inward 
and an image appears, at first faint but growing. The image carries a feeling with it of wanting 
to be born. If the inspiration is genuine, this impression never fades. Creator, creation, and the 
process of creating are fused. I would call this the literal meaning of imagination; it is much 
more than having a nice idea you would like to carry out. 

In stage five the fusing isn't complete. The greatest artists still suffer pangs of doubt and 
failure of inspiration. So do co-creators. In particular, there is the danger of trying to take over 
the process, which severs the alliance with God. Self-importance can halt progress for a long 
time. This is easy to trace in artists: reading a biography of Ernest Hemingway, you cringe as 
the balance of ego and genius tragically shifts. A writer gifted beyond measure in his thirties, 
Hemingway describes how his stories wrote themselves, how in magical moments he stood 
aside from the process and allowed it to happen. In the same mental state, the poet William 
Blake declared, "My words are mine and yet not mine." 

Over the years, this delicacy of awareness departed, and Hemingway descended into a 
much more ordinary kind of struggle. Immersed in the labor of writing, he churned out 
massive manuscripts that were products of confused labor. On the spiritual plane the danger 
of losing the connection looms for anyone still in the grip of self-importance. Eventually 
Hemingway succumbed to failure and self-destruction. The God of stage five is more 
forgiving; no one is ever deprived of the evolutionary impulse. Struggles with self-importance 
can last a long time, but they always end once the person finds a way to give more of the 
responsibility back to God. In other words, the way to power is to give up power. This is the 
great lesson the ego is confronted with in this phase. 

What is my greatest temptation? ... 

Solipsism. 

The power to make your wishes come true is very real, but it is as much feared as desired. 
This fear is succinctly stated in the saying "Be careful what you wish for — it might come 
true." And many people do find themselves feeling ambivalent when they get the dreamed-for 
job or the dreamed-for wife. I say that this is really a false danger, however; the nature of 
inner growth is that as you gain more power, you deserve to have it. If something comes true 
that has its disadvantages, the balance of good and bad reflects your own awareness. This we 
will discuss in stage six, where actual miracles become possible. 

What’s much more dangerous here is solipsism, believing that only your mind is real, 
while all objects out there in the world are mirages that depend upon you, the perceiver, and 
without you they would melt away. Some paranoid schizophrenics suffer from precisely this 



illusion, and will go to any lengths to stay awake, so great is their fear that nodding off will 
bring the world to an end. 

In stage five the temptation is to stay locked in yourself. I mentioned that when desire 
becomes most efficient, no outer struggle is needed. It is as if God takes over and things 
unfold on automatic pilot. But this cannot become an excuse for lethargy. The person still 
plays his part. Paradoxically, he may go through the same motions as someone who doesn't 
have any awareness of being a co-creator. The difference takes place inside one's mind. To a 
co-creator, life has a true flow; things are connected in patterns and rhythms; all details make 
sense. 

When this point of view is alive, all work becomes deeply satisfying. One is no longer 
obsessed with failure or performance anxiety. More important, the achieved result brings 
fulfillment. This is lost, however, if you fall into solipsism. The ego, as it takes charge of 
holding the world together, forgets that creation depends upon grace. Stage five isn't really 
measured by how much you can achieve. Someone who achieves close intimacy with God 
may choose to accomplish very little. But no matter what is achieved, there is a constant 
feeling of being blessed. This becomes the object of all desiring, not the outward show. 


STAGE SIX: 
GOD OF MIRACLES 
(Visionary Response) 


God the Creator gave open access to the entire cosmos, including its dark places and secret 
compartments. To accept his generosity, a person must also be unafraid of his own dark 
places, and this is rarely the case. Who can see himself purely as a child of light? I once read 
in an inspirational book the following: This is a recreational universe. Your ability to play in 
it is limited only by how much you can appreciate. On reading these words it occurred to me 
that the world's greatest saints and masters may be simply enjoying themselves. They have the 
ability to live in the light while the rest of us cannot. 

It is hard to imagine yourself as a citizen of the universe, utterly without hindrance and 
limitation. The Catholic Church recognizes dozens of saints who could levitate, be in two 
places at once, emit light from their bodies as they prayed, and perform healings. (As late as 
the 1950s parishioners in Los Angeles testified to seeing their priest rise from the ground 
when he lost himself in the passion of his sermon.) 

Yet for all their miracles, or because of them, we thi nk of saints as being without fun, 
loving relationships, sexual impulses. It's impossible to imagine a saint with money and a 
good car. Without the right appurtenances — white robe, sandals, a halo of virtue — the 
enlightened need not apply. 

In stage six all of these assumptions are tested. Full-blown miracles are now possible. Here 
we accept God's invitation to transform material existence, and there is ecstatic joy in that. 

For example, one of the most charming saintly souls in recent times was a nun of the late 
Victorian era named Sister Marie of Jesus Crucified, who lived among the Carmelites near 
Bethlehem. She had been bom a poor Arab in the region, one Mariam Baouardy, and worked 
as a housemaid before taking her vows. (2) 

Upon entering the convent in 1 874 it was discovered that this novice had the alarming 
habit of suddenly swooping up to the tops of trees, where she flitted from branch to branch 
like a bird. Some of the twigs she landed on were not strong enough to hold a bird. This feat 
embarrassed Mariam, since she had no way of predicting or controlling her ecstasies, and on 


at least one occasion (eight were observed in total), Mariam timidly asked her companion to 
turn her back and not look. 

In her ecstatic state, the "little one," as Mariam was known, sang constantly in praise of 
God. The prioress in charge, rather than falling to her knees in awe, ordered Mariam to come 
back to earth immediately. 

At the moment she heard the word "obedience, " the ecstatic came down "with a 
radiant face" and perfect modesty, stopping at several branches to chant "Love!"... 

"Why do you rise like this?" the Mother Superior interrogated her. 

"The Lamb [ Christ] carries me in his hands, " Mariam answered. "If I obey quickly, 
the tree becomes like this, " and she put her hand close to the ground. 

Somewhere in a remote corner of the world, someone whose name is completely unknown 
to us is taking flight, I am sure. The fact that skeptics deny the existence of miracles matters 
not at all. The existence of miracles announces the God of stage six, who has the following 
qualities: 

Transformative 

Mystical 

Enlightened 

Beyond all causes 

Existing 

Healing 

Magical 

Alchemist 

Words can convey only a hint of the Being we are talking about. A God of miracles is 
buried so deep in the quantum world that even those who have spent years in prayer and 
meditation may have detected no trace of him. The material world is set up to do without his 
presence, which makes the God of miracles profoundly mystical even by religious standards. 
Was Jesus exaggerating when he made his most dramatic claim about the powers God can 
bestow? 

I tell you this: if you have faith no bigger than a mustard seed, you will say to this 
mountain, "Move from here to there," and it will move; nothing will prove impossible 
for you. 

There is an explanation for this promise. The most mystical of the gospels is the Book of 
John. Consider its description of creation: "In the beginning was the word, and the word was 
with God, and the word was God." In other parts of the Bible, a writer who wanted to refer to 
divine wisdom would call it "the word," but here John says "the word is God." Clearly no 
ordinary word is implied. Something like the following is meant: Before there was time and 
space, a faint vibration existed outside the cosmos. This vibration had everything contained in 
it — all universes, all events, all time and space. This primordial vibration was with God. As 
far as we can fathom, it is God. Divine intelligence was compressed in this "word," and when 
the time came for the universe to be born, the "word" transformed itself into energy and 
matter. 

In stage six, a person returns to the word, in all its primordial power, to discover the 
source. Behind everything is a vibration — not in the sense of a sound or an energy wave, 
because those are material, but a "mother vibration" at the virtual level that includes 



everything. In India the sound of the divine mother took the name om, and it is believed that 
meditating on this sound will unlock all the mother's secrets. Perhaps om is the very word 
John is referring to. No one will know for sure who hasn't arrived at stage six. But we can 
imagine it because the greatest miracle workers tend to have disciples, and in all ages 
disciples say much the same thing about a sacred master: 

1 . Being in his presence is enough to change your life. The God of miracles is 
transformative. 

2. There is a holy aura about the master that the mind cannot fathom. The God of 
miracles is mystical. 

3. A sacred master exhibits higher states of consciousness. The God of miracles is 
enlightened. 

4. The master's actions follow a secret reasoning that sometimes makes no sense to his 
followers. The God of miracles is beyond all causes. 

5. The master purifies other people of their imperfections and may be able to cure illness. 
The God of miracles is healing. 

6. The master can perform wonders that defy explanation. The God of miracles is 
magical. 

7. The master may be interested in esoteric science. The God of miracles is an alchemist. 

These qualities don't tell us, however, about the inner workings of a saint's mind. What 
brain mechanism, if any, gives visions of God and makes miracles possible? All we really 
have is scattered clues. Some researchers have speculated that the two hemispheres of the 
brain become completely balanced in higher states of consciousness. A yogic tradition holds 
that the breath also becomes balanced; instead of favoring one nostril, a person finds that a 
soft, faint breath rhythm flows from both. Another speculation holds that the brain becomes 
more "coherent," meaning that the wave patterns that are usually jumbled and disconnected 
fall in synch, rather like the synchronized beating of millions of heart cells during normal 
cardiac rhythm. But such coherence has been rarely spotted and is open to dispute. 

So what we are left with is an elusive brain function that I will call the visionary response. 

It is marked by the ability to change energy states outside the body, causing objects and 
events to be transformed. As vague as that sounds, to someone in stage six, miracles are as 
easy as any other mental process. No brain researcher has come within miles of describing the 
necessary shift that must be achieved to perform a miracle. 

Once you admit the existence of the visionary response, it is fascinating to leam how 
important symbols and images are. Healing, for example, is never the same from one culture 
to the next. In our culture the human heart is seen as a machine — the old ticker — that wears 
out over time. We fix it through mechanical repairs, as one might a worn-out clock. So when 
we find out that widowers have a high incidence of sudden death from heart attacks, the fact 
that sadness can kill doesn't compute very well. Not many sad machines die. 

In certain regions of the Amazon, the body is considered an extension of the jungle. In this 
environment ants are carriers of bad things — toxins, poisons, rotted food, etc. According to an 
account by a visiting anthropologist, a villager once came to the local medicine man with a 
swollen abscess in his jaw due to a rotting tooth. The medicine man tied a string around it, 
and immediately a troop of large ants emerged from the man's mouth and marched down the 
string. They earned away the poison, and the villager recovered without having his tooth 
extracted. 

Symbols aside, how did this healing work? One is reminded of the psychic surgeons of the 
Philippines, who seem to penetrate a patient's body with their hands and pull out all manner of 



bloody tissue, none of it anything that would be seen inside a body at autopsy. In many cases 
patients report that they can actually feel the surgeon's lingers, and dramatic recoveries have 
been reported. 

In quantum terms we can offer an explanation for what medicine men are accomplishing 
on the outskirts of the miraculous. The medicine man is not using hypnosis, but at the same 
time he isn't operating on the physical plane, either. As we know from our quantum model, 
any object can be reduced to packets of energy. Up to now, however, our consciousness could 
not change these invisible patterns of photons except in a very limited way. We can imagine a 
healthy body, for example, but that image doesn't keep us from getting sick. The medicine 
man turns a mental image into physical reality — in fact, this is what all miracle workers do. 

At the quantum level they "see" a new result, and in that vision the new result emerges. 

A power struggle ensues, and the medicine man must be more powerful than his patient in 
order to make any kind of permanent change in his condition. What he is trying to alter are the 
energy patterns that have become distorted, thus causing the disease. A rotten tooth, a tumor, 
or a detached retina are all a cluster of photons, a warped image made of light. 

The key question is not whether a medicine man is real or fake but how powerful his 
consciousness is, for he alone makes the patient enter into altered reality with him, along with 
any nearby observers. I have to emphasize "nearby" because this is a field effect, and just as a 
magnet can attract iron only at a certain distance, the miracle worker has a limited range of 
ability. It is even said that having too many people in the room can defeat the phenomenon. 
The lump of consciousness that they form is too large to handle, like a lump of iron too large 
for a magnet to pull. 

When the Virgin Mary appeared near Fatima, Portugal, in 1917, a huge crowd estimated at 
seventy thousand gathered for the apparition, which had been promised to three local peasant 
children. Those closest to the children reported that the sun whirled in the sky and dove 
toward the earth in a rainbow radiance, but others farther away saw only a bright light, and at 
a greater distance nothing at all was witnessed. The children themselves fell to their knees and 
talked with Mary herself. 

When the wonder is over, the observer leaves the miracle worker's sphere of influence. 

The field effect no longer works, so everyone recaptures his normal state of awareness. The 
transition can be bumpy — some people faint or feel dizzy. The miraculous world fades, giving 
rise to a sense of vagueness over what actually happened. At the level of ordinary life, the 
events remain baffling, hence the widespread skepticism over holy apparitions, psychic 
surgeons, and jungle medicine men. But the visionary response describes another level of 
consciousness where energy patterns are shifting with every thought. The fact that these shifts 
change the outer world is amazing to us but natural to the person in stage six. 

Who am I ? ... 

Enlightened awareness. 

We have come a long way with the question "Who am I?" Starting with the physical body 
in stage one and steadily moving to less physical planes, now we arrive at nothing but 
awareness. "I" am not even the mind, only the light. My identity floats in a quantum fog as 
photons wink in and out of existence. Observing these shifting patterns, I feel no attachment 
to any of them. They come and go; I am not even troubled by having no permanent home. It is 
enough to be bathed in the light. 

Of the million ways you could define enlightenment, identifying with the light is a good 
one. Miracle workers do more than access energy patterns. As the Vedas say, "This isn't 
knowledge you learn; it's knowledge you turn into." Jesus spoke in parables but could easily 
have been literal when he declared to his disciples, "You are the light of the world." 



At any given moment, it is impossible to compute how many human beings have turned 
into miracle workers. According to mystical Judaism, thirty-six pure souls, known as the 
Lamed Vov, hold the world together, keeping God from destroying the sinners who offend 
him. Some sects in India reduce this number to seven enlightened masters at any one time. 
However, we are also told in the Old Testament that God would spare Sodom and Gomorrah 
if fifty righteous men could be found, only to whittle the number down to one (Lot, whose 
wife was turned into a pillar of salt — but the cities were destroyed anyway). By implication, if 
you aspire to join any of these groups, your chances are slim. Is it plausible to hold out for 
enlightenment? 

The vast majority of people have said no by their actions if not their words. It should be 
pointed out that miracle-working is accessible before sainthood. When you see any image in 
your brain, you are shifting reality. A mental image is faint and quickly fades away, but no 
matter. The critical operation behind a miracle is one that you can perform. The difference 
between you and a miracle worker is that you do not create a strong enough force field to 
make your mental image project itself onto the outer world. 

Even so, if you come into the force field of a greater soul, your reality can shift quickly. I 
heard an interesting account about a Western-trained doctor who had traveled into the depths 
of the Colombian rain forest. While climbing the slippery rock face beside a waterfall, he lost 
his footing and took a severe fall. His back was injured to the extent that he couldn't walk. 

The expedition was a hundred miles from the nearest town, and there were no phones or 
electricity. 

For several days he rested in a small village, hoping that he might get free enough of pain 
to make it out on his own, but his condition worsened as the injured tissue became more 
inflamed. In desperation he finally agreed to allow a tribal shaman to work on him. The 
shaman came in and began to enter a trance, taking hallucinogenic herbs and chanting for 
several hours. In the middle of the ritual, the injured doctor found himself dozing and drifting 
off. When he awoke the shaman was gone, and so was his back pain. To his astonishment, he 
could stand up and walk as if nothing untoward had occurred. 

"I have no idea how this happened," he recounted, "but I wonder about one thing. I had 
reached the point of total desperation before I permitted them to call this medicine man in. I 
didn't believe in him, but at least I was willing not to disbelieve." 

I think that this man closed the gulf between himself and the healer in a significant way. 

He permitted the shaman to go into the light without resistance. Some faith healers will often 
precede the laying on of hands by asking, "Do you believe that God can cure you?" From the 
larger perspective, no one has the power to keep God out totally. We can only open or close 
our acceptance of the light. It helps to create a process that will gently create more willingness 
to be open. No matter what documentation is offered for miracles, many people will say, "But 
have you seen one yourself?" I have come as close as I need to, just recently, in fact. I have a 
cousin, a veteran of combat in Kashmir, who was struck with a virulent case of hepatitis C a 
few years ago. We are a family of doctors, and he received every sort of treatment, including 
interferon, but to no avail. His platelet counts dropped alarmingly and his viral count from the 
hepatitis soared. 

A few months ago he turned to an energy healer in India, who passed his hands over my 
cousin's liver to extract the disease entity. In a short time, his platelet counts were back to 
normal, his viral count had subsided, and there were no symptoms of any disease. To me this 
is a miracle. It seems to be a teachable one as well. You can take most people in our society 
and school them successfully in the art of "healing touch," which requires a practitioner to run 
her hands over the body a few inches over the skin to feel where there are energy hot spots 
(detected as a patch of warm air over that region). The practitioner then moves this excess 



energy to dispel it, and in many cases some healing is achieved, usually in the form of more 
rapid recovery than from conventional treatments. 

Are there really warm patches over the diseased portions of our bodies? If so, why should 
that make any difference in a patient's recovery? The answer depends on the fact that the basis 
of healing isn't material but quantum. Things are real in the quantum world if you make them 
real, and that is done by manipulating light. With care and patience, anyone can be taught to 
do that; healing touch is only one mode. If we formed a school for teaching nurses how to get 
streams of jungle ants to emerge from a sick person's mouth, some pupils would be decidedly 
talented at it. Likewise, any miracle may be within reach, if only we begin to alter our 
conception of who we are and how our minds work. 

How do I fit in?... 

I love. 

When he realizes that he is bathed in light, the feeling that comes over a miracle worker is 
one of intense love. This is because he is absorbing the qualities of spirit that the light 
contains. When Jesus said "I am the light," he meant "I'm totally in God's force field." In India 
people from every walk of life are eager to put themselves in a saint's force field, which is 
called darshan, a Sanskrit word that means to be in someone's sight. A few years ago I went 
for darshan at the home of a woman saint outside Bombay known to her followers simply as 
Mother. 

Her home was tiny, a brick bungalow in a small village. I was escorted upstairs to an even 
tinier sitting room where she was waiting on a sofa by the window. Her attendant, an older 
woman, waved me silently to a chair. Mother herself, dressed in a gold sari and with large, 
expressive eyes, appeared to be around thirty- We all sat quietly. The warm drizzle outside 
turned to tropical rain; no other sound made itself felt. Time passed, and I began to notice a 
wonderful sweetness in the room, which made my mind very peaceful. My eyes closed, but I 
was aware that Mother was looking at me. After half an hour, her attendant quietly asked if I 
had any questions to ask. 

"Feel free," she said. "After all, you are talking to God. Whatever you ask she will take 
care of." 

I didn't find this startling. In India when a person reaches a state of consciousness that is 
completely intimate with God, he or she is respectfully referred to in this way. But I had no 
questions. I could feel without a doubt that this young woman was creating an atmosphere of 
her own that was very tender and loving. It offered such reassurance that one could believe, at 
that moment, in a "mother energy" inherent in the universe. 

In stage six all gods and goddesses are aspects of oneself expressed as fine energy states. I 
am not declaring myself a devotee when I say that Mother could make these energies felt. The 
only real surprise is that she could do this for a stranger, since we all feel the mother energy as 
children around our own mothers. In India it is well known that darshan isn't the same with 
every saint. Some saints have a presence that is almost trancelike; others create a flavor like 
honey or the fragrance of flowers. The "darshan junkies" who spend hours in the presence of 
holy people can recite which shakti, or power, is felt around one saint or the next. And it is 
believed that these flavors of God can be absorbed by visitors like water by a sponge. 

The most touching moment with Mother came as I was leaving. Her attendant showed me 
to the door and sent me away with a remark in broken English. "Now you have no more 
troubles," she said cheerfully. "God is going to pay your bills!" 

No one could claim that stage six alone reveals God's love. But the analogy to magnetism 
works well here. A compass needle exposed to the earth's weak magnetic field trembles 



toward north; it does this unerringly, but if you shake the compass the needle wavers. Hold it 
close to a huge electromagnet, however, and the needle will lock into place without wavering. 

Likewise, we are all in the force field of love, but in early stages of spiritual growth, its 
power is weak. We waver and can easily be thrown off in other directions. Conflicted 
emotions are at play, but more important, our perception of love is blocked. Only after years 
of cleaning out the inner blockages of repression, doubt, negative emotions, and old 
conditioning does a person realize that God's force is immensely powerful. When this occurs, 
nothing can pull the mind away from love. Love as a personal emotion is transmuted into a 
cosmic energy. Rumi puts it beautifully: 

Oh God 

I have discovered love! 

How marvelous, how good, how beautiful it is!... 

I offer my salutation 

To the spirit of passion that aroused and excited this whole universe 

And all it contains. 

Rumi believes that every atom in creation dances in a passion for God, such is a stage six 
awareness. It takes a quantum leap in consciousness to love God all the time, yet when the 
leap is finally made, there is really no God to love, not as a separate object. The fusion of the 
worshiper and what he worships is nearly complete. But that is enough to animate everything 
in creation. "This is the love," Rumi declares, "that brings our body to life." 

How do I find God? ... 

Grace. 

In stage six it is no longer necessary to seek God, just as we do not have to seek gravity. 
God is inescapable and constant. Sometimes he is felt with ecstasy, but just as often there can 
be pain, anguish, and confusion. This mixture of feelings reminds us that two entities are 
coming into conjunction. One is spirit, the other is body. The body can perceive spirit only 
through the nervous system. As the intensity of God increases, the nervous system is 
overwhelmed by it. There is no choice but to adapt, yet adaptation can cause sensations of 
intense burning, tremors, blackouts, and fainting, along with fear and semipsychotic states. It 
is still quite common to come across medical "explanations" of saintly visions as epileptic 
seizures, for example, and the blinding light of holy visions as a by-product of severe 
migraines. How do we know that this isn't true? 

One obvious rebuttal is that migraines and epilepsy aren't inspiring. They do not bring 
wisdom and insight, whereas saints appear to be pure examples of grace at work. One thinks 
of the Polish mystic, Father Maximilian Kolbe, a saintly figure who died under the Nazis at 
Auschwitz. (3) Although emaciated and a longtime sufferer from tuberculosis, Kolbe gave 
away most of his meager rations to other prisoners. When utterly parched with thirst, he was 
offered a contraband cup of tea by a doctor also imprisoned in the camp, but refused to take it 
because the other inmates had nothing to drink. Without complaint, Father Maximilian 
endured incessant beatings and torture. In the end, he was present when another prisoner was 
condemned to die of starvation in an underground vault. Kolbe volunteered to take the man's 
place. When the crypt was opened some days later, everyone had perished but he, and he was 
killed with a lethal injection. 

In his own eyes Kolbe was not a martyr. A few fellow prisoners, and even some Nazis, 
gave firsthand accounts of the state of grace he occupied. A Jewish survivor testified under 
oath that Father Maximilian emanated light when he prayed at night. (This account is 


seconded by several others in the years before the priest was arrested.) In demeanor he was 
simple and humble. When asked how he could endure with such gentleness the treatment he 
was receiving at the hands of the Nazis, he said only that evil must be met with love. 

Few saint stories are more moving than this one, which leaves us feeling that grace might 
be superhuman. In one sense it is, in that God's presence overcomes the most intense 
conditions of pain and suffering. In another sense, though, grace offers constant support in 
everyday life. There is no way to tell, as we work through each stage of inner growth, whether 
we are actually doing anything through our own will. An Indian master was once asked, 
"When we strive to reach higher states of consciousness, are we really doing anything or is it 
just happening to us?" 

"It could be seen either way," he replied. "You are doing your part, but the real motivation 
comes from outside you. If you wanted to be strictly accurate, it is all happening to you." 

If God is like a force field in stage six, grace is his magnetic pull. Grace adapts itself to 
each person. We make our choices, some of which are good for us, some bad, and then grace 
shapes the results. To express this another way, each of us does things that have unexpected 
consequences. Our foresight is limited; therefore our actions are always subject to blindness 
about what will happen next. 

The word karma includes both the action and the unpredictable results. Five people can 
make a fortune, yet for each one the money creates different consequences, which can range 
from misery to contentment. The same holds true for any action. Why isn't karma 
mechanical? Why doesn’t action A always lead to result B? The law of karma is often 
compared to simple cause and effect, using the analogy of billiard balls being hit with a cue 
stick. The angles and bounces in a billiard game are very complex, but a skilled player can 
compute his shot in advance with extreme accuracy, thereby predicting the path of a ball even 
after it has left his control. 

If karma were mechanical, the same would hold for our actions. We would plan them out, 
let them go, and be sure of a certain result. Theoretically nothing prevents this. In actuality we 
are stymied by the sheer complexity of what needs to be calculated. Everyone performs 
millions of actions every day — strictly speaking, every thought is a karma, along with every 
breath, every bite of food, etc. — so the billiard game in this case has a nearly infinite number 
of balls. But something unfathomable is at work here: grace. 

With his supreme intelligence, God has no trouble calculating an infinite number of 
billiard balls or an infinite number of karmas. This mechanical operation could be as easily 
performed by a supercomputer. Yet God also loves his creation and wants to be joined with it 
as intimately as possible, so he throws into his calculation the following special instruction: 
Let all of a person's actions bounce and collide any way they have to, but leave a clue that 
spirit is watching. 

When you feel you have been touched by grace, that is your clue that God exists and cares 
about what happens to you. I know a middle-aged man, now the owner of his own computer 
firm, whose entrepreneurial streak first surfaced when he was twenty. Unfortunately, at that 
time it took the form of smuggling drugs across the Caribbean in a light plane. 

"I only made one trip before I was detained by the customs officials and almost arrested. 

As it happens, I didn't have any cargo left on board. But they never found out why, and that is 
an amazing story," he says. "I was flying out of the Bahamas when we encountered dense 
cloud cover. I dipped down to escape it, but the fog went down to ground level. Somehow in 
all this maneuvering, my partner and I lost our bearings. We wasted time trying to get back on 
course, growing more and more worried. The Caribbean is a great deal of ocean and only a 
few small places to land. 

"We began to run out of fuel and panic set in. My partner started shouting, and we 
jettisoned all our extra gas cans, then the cargo, and finally our luggage in an attempt to get 



lighter. The fog didn’t lift, and I could tell that my co-pilot was frozen with fear. He was sure 
that we were going to die. At that moment, I had the unearthly certainty that we weren't. 

"I looked to my left, and a hole opened in the fog. I could see a tiny island beneath my 
wing tip, and on it a short dirt landing strip. I dove the plane through as the clouds closed up 
again, and we landed, only to have five customs officials converge on us half an hour later. 
But the whole time of our interrogation, I heard an inner voice that told me my life had been 
saved for a reason. I didn't become religious in any conventional sense, but this was 
something I never doubted again." 

Whether operating on the level of a saint or a criminal, grace is the ingredient that saves 
karma from being heartlessly mechanical. Grace is thus linked to free will. A billiard ball 
must follow its assigned trajectory, and a thief who commits robbery a hundred times would 
seem to be just as set on his course. But even though his karma is set, at any given moment he 
has the opportunity to stop and mend his ways. Grace can take the form of a simple thought, 
"Maybe I should quit," or it can be an overwhelming transformation like the one endured by 
Saint Paul on the road to Damascus when the divine light blinded him and struck him from 
his horse. In either case, the impulse to move toward spirit is the result of grace. 

What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is a cosmic force. 

Evil is another aspect of the same force. 

It is so difficult to be good that eventually a person must give up. This is a realization that 
arrives in stage six. Being good seems easy at first, when it is a simple matter of obeying the 
rules and staying out of trouble. It becomes harder after conscience enters in, because our 
conscience is often at odds with desire. This is the phase, familiar to every three-year-old, 
when one voice inside whispers "Do it!" while another says, "Better not." In Christianity this 
struggle is predestined to end with the victory of good, since God is more powerful than 
Satan, but in Hinduism the forces of light and darkness will battle eternally, the balance of 
power shifting in cycles that last thousands of years. 

If Hinduism is right, then trying to resist evil is ultimately pointless. The demons (called 
asuras in Sanskrit) never give up. They can't, in fact, since they are built into the structure of 
nature, where death and decay are inevitable. As the Indian sages see it, the universe depends 
as much on death as it does on life. "People fear dying without thinking," one master 
remarked. "If you got your fantasy of living forever, you would be condemning yourself to 
eternal senility." Because the body breaks down over time, and even the galaxies are heading 
toward "heat death" when the stars burn out their supply of energy, the universe must contain 
a mechanism for renewal. Death is the escape route it has devised. 

In stage six a person is visionary enough to see this. He still retains a conception of good. 

It is the force of evolution that lies behind birth, growth, love, truth, and beauty. He also 
retains a conception of evil. It is the force that opposes evolution — we would call it entropy — 
leading to decomposition, dissolution, inertia, and "sin" (in the special sense of any action that 
doesn't help a person's evolution). However, to the visionary these are two sides of the same 
force. God created both because both are needed; God is in the evil as much as in the good. 

One should emphasize that this isn't an ethical viewpoint. You can't argue against it by 
saying, "Look at this atrocity and that horror. Don’t tell me God is there." Every stage of inner 
growth is an interpretation, and each interpretation is valid. If you see victims of crimes and 
heartrending injustice, that is real for you, but the saint, even as he brings untold compassion 
to such people, may not see victims at all. I am reluctant to go too deeply into this, because 
the grip of victimization is so powerful. To tell the abused and the abuser that they are locked 
in the same dance is hard to get across — ask any therapist who works with battered women. 



I think there is no doubt, however, that the saint sees the sinner inside himself, just as the 
saint accepts evil as calmly as any other occurrence. It is reported by eyewitnesses that when 
Father Maximilian was being injected with poison by the Nazis, he used his last ounce of 
strength to bare his arm willingly to the needle. During those terrible days when he was 
trapped in a crypt with other prisoners, the concentration camp guards were astonished by the 
atmosphere of peace created around the Franciscan monk. This story does not mitigate the 
evil of Nazism, which has to be countered at its own level. But the working out of the soul 
stands apart, and at some point the dance of good and evil becomes one. 

What is my life challenge? ... 

To attain liberation. 

When stage six dawns, the purpose of life changes. Instead of striving for goodness and 
virtue, the person aims to escape bondage. I don’t mean escape by dying and going to heaven, 
although that interpretation certainly is valid for those who hold it. The real escape of stage 
six is karmic. Karma is infinite and ongoing. Cause and effect never ends; its entanglement is 
so overwhelming that you could not end even a portion of your personal karma. But God's 
force field, as we have been calling it, exerts an attraction to pull the soul out of the range of 
karma. Cause and effect will not be destroyed. The most enlightened saint still has a physical 
body subject to decay and death; he still eats, drinks, and sleeps. However, all of this energy 
gets used in a different way. 

"If you spent every moment turning every thought and action to good," an Indian master 
told his disciples, "you would be just as far from enlightenment as someone who used every 
moment for evil." Surprising as this sounds, for we all equate goodness and God, the force of 
goodness is still karmic. Good deeds have their own rewards, just as bad deeds do. What if 
you don't want any reward at all but just to be free? This is the state Buddhists call nirvana, 
much misunderstood when it is translated as "oblivion." 

Nirvana is the release from karmic influences, the end of the dance of opposites. The 
visionary response enables you to see that wanting A or B is always going to lead to its 
opposite. If I am born wealthy, I may be delighted at first. I can fulfill any desire and follow 
any whim. But eventually boredom sets in; I will grow restless, and in many cases my life will 
be burdened by the heavy responsibility of managing my wealth. So as I toss in bed, worried 
about all these irksome things, I will begin to think how nice it is to be poor. The poor have 
little to lose; they are free of duties on corporate boards and charities. 

However long it takes, according to Buddhism, my mind will eventually desire the 
opposite of what I have. The karmic pendulum swings until it reaches the extreme of poverty, 
and then it will pull me back toward wealth again. Since only God is free from cause and 
effect, to want nirvana means that you want to attain God-realization. In the earlier stages of 
growth this ambition would be impossible, and most religions condemn it as blasphemy. 
Nirvana isn't moral. Good and evil don’t count anymore, once they are seen as the two faces 
of the same duality. For the sake of keeping society together, religions hold it as a duty to 
respect goodness and abhor evil. Hence a paradox: the person who wants to be liberated is 
acting against God. Many devout Christians find themselves utterly baffled by Eastern 
spirituality because they cannot resolve this paradox. How can God want us to be good and 
yet want us to go beyond good? 

The answer takes place entirely in consciousness. Saints in every culture turn out to be 
exemplars of goodness, shining with virtue. But the Bhaghavad-Gita informs us that there are 
no outward signs of enlightenment, which means that saints do not have to obey any 
conventional standards of behavior. In India there exists the "left-hand path" to God. On this 
path a devotee shuns conventional virtue and goodness. Sexual abstinence is often replaced 



with sexual indulgence (usually in a highly ritualized way). One might give up a loving home 
to live in a graveyard; some tantric devotees go so far as to sleep with corpses and eat the 
most repulsive decayed food. In other cases the left-hand path is not so extreme, but it is 
always different from orthodox religious observance. 

The left-hand path may seem like the dark side of spirituality, totally deluded in its 
barbarity and insanity — certainly Christian missionaries to India had no problem holding that 
interpretation. They shuddered to look upon Kali with her necklace of skulls and blood 
dripping from her fangs. What kind of mother was this? But the left-hand way is thousands of 
years old, its origins in sacred texts that exhibit as much wisdom as any in the world. They 
state that God cannot be confined in any way. His infinite grace encompasses death and 
decay; he is in the corpse as well as the newborn baby. For some (very few) people, to see this 
truth isn't enough; they want to experience it. And God will not deny them. In the West our 
abhorrence of the left-hand path doesn't need to be challenged. Cultures each go their own 
way. I wonder, though, what went through Socrates' mind as he drank the cup of hemlock. It 
is possible, since he willed his own death by refusing to escape the court's sentence, that the 
poison was sweet to him. And Father Maximilian may have felt bliss when the fatal needle 
went into his arm. In stage six the alchemy of turning evil into a blessing is a mystery that is 
solved by longing for liberation. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Holiness. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

False idealism. 

Skeptics often point out that gullibility increases the more someone needs a miracle. Since 
miracles are required to prove that a saint is real (at least in Catholicism), there is a 
tremendous temptation to make one up. In stage six little room is left for any kind of 
wrongdoing, but in the tiny crevice that is left, a person could lose the distinction between 
holiness and false idealism. Let me give an example. 

In 1531, a native Indian in Mexico was walking on foot toward the settlement of the 
Spanish conquerors near Mexico City when a beautiful lady appeared to him on the summit of 
a hill. She gave him a message to take to the bishop and offered her blessing. In awe, the 
Indian, whose name comes down to us as Juan Diego, did as he was told. When he recounted 
his vision, the bishop was skeptical, but then one of the most delicate of Christian miracles 
occurred. Juan Diego opened his rough-woven cloak and out spilled beautiful red roses. At 
that moment he and the wonder-struck bishop observed that a painting of the Virgin Mother 
had appeared inside his cloak, which now hangs in a magnificent basilica in Hidalgo, outside 
Mexico City, on the spot where the miracle of Guadalupe occurred. 

As with the Shroud of Turin, skeptics have wanted to ran tests on this miraculous image to 
see if it was painted by human hands. They point out how conveniently this apparition of the 
Virgin Mary appeared, just when the Spanish were most zealous to convert Indians. (The 
miracle did lead to mass conversions.) On the face of it, one might say that any event that 
helped end the slaughter of the Native Americans was a kind of miracle. Yet lost somewhere 
in history is this distinction between holiness and false idealism. 

Holiness is what makes a miracle miraculous; more is needed than simply defying the laws 
of nature. Illusionists can do that when they throw knives blindfolded or saw a woman in half. 
As long as you don't know the secret, the illusion is a miracle. In this section I have been 
speculating on how miracles work, but the deeper secret is why they are holy. The saint isn’t a 
magician. He transforms more than lead into gold; a saint transforms the stuff of the soul. His 



attitude is one of simplicity and purity. The first American to be canonized as a saint was 
Frances Cabrini. When she was still an impoverished nun in Italy, Mother Cabrini was 
praying when another sister broke into her room without knocking. 

To her astonishment, the room was filled with a soft radiance. The sister was speechless, 
but Mother Cabrini remarked offhandedly, "This isn't anything. Just ignore it and go on with 
what you were doing." From that day on, the saint made sure that her privacy was securely 
kept, and the only clue for outsiders was a faint light that occasionally crept out underneath 
her door. It is a mark of the true miracle worker to be comfortable with God's power. Holiness 
is marked by a selfless innocence — I would like to think that even if the image at Guadalupe 
is a forgery, at least the roses were real. Tiying to be holy is not innocent. It may be well 
intentioned, but in stage six idealism has no place; only the real thing will do. J. Krishnamurti, 
during his more than sixty years of spiritual teaching, used to point out something very 
interesting about happiness. "If you are feeling very happy," he said, "you don't have to speak 
about it. Happiness is its own thing and needs no words; it doesn’t even need to be thought 
about. But the instant you start to say, 'I am happy,' this innocence is lost. You have created a 
gap, however small, between yourself and the genuine feeling. So do not think that when you 
speak of God, you are near him. Your words have created the gap that you must cross to get 
back to him, and you will never cross it with your mind." 

Idealism is born of the mind. In stage six the saint may sing about God and even speak 
about him, but the holy relationship is so private that nothing can break in on it. 

What is my greatest temptation? ... 

Martyrdom. 

Are saints tempted to turn into martyrs? In the third century we are told that there was an 
epidemic of martyrdom in the Roman empire. At that time Christianity was not recognized as 
an official religion but seen as a cult, which could be prosecuted under the law. (Oddly, it 
wasn’t the worship of Jesus that offended the courts but the fact that Christianity was too new 
to be lawful.) Those who would not sacrifice to the emperor as a god were sentenced to death, 
and eager Christians gave up their lives in the arena as proof of their faith. 

Traditionally it is held that the martyrs were legion and that they played a huge part in 
converting the pagan world. Spectators could not believe their eyes when they saw Christians 
smiling and singing hymns as the lion tore them to pieces. The spectacle shook their 
confidence in the old gods and helped pave the way for the final victory of the new religion in 
313, when it became the official faith of the empire. But tradition strays from the facts in two 
ways. First, the number of martyrs was probably much smaller than once believed. Most 
Christians willingly escaped the death sentence by such stratagems as sending a servant to 
sacrifice to the emperor in their place. Second, one large segment of the faith did not believe 
in martyrdom. The so-called Gnostics held that God existed entirely within oneself. Father, 
Son, and Holy Ghost were all aspects of consciousness. Therefore holiness was everywhere, 
in every person, and the emperor could be as divine as anyone else. 

For this and other heresies, the Gnostics were despised and persecuted as soon as the 
Christian bishops came to power. By wiping them out, the early church installed martyrdom 
as one of the highest paths to God. Dying for the faith became exalted as imitation of Christ. 

It must also have set a symbolic pattern in place, for we find such gentle souls as Saint Francis 
of Assisi enduring the terrible anguish of stigmata. This is the phenomenon whereby one 
personally undergoes crucifixion by bleeding from the palms and feet like Christ on the cross. 

I am not denigrating martyrdom here, only pointing out that stage six is not the end of the 
journey, not quite yet. As long as suffering holds any temptation, there is some hint of sin, 
and in that arises the last tiny separation between God and the devotee. The ego retains 



enough power to say that "I" am proving my holiness to God. In the next stage there will be 
nothing left to prove and therefore no "I" at all. Getting to that point is the last struggle of the 
saint. From the outside, we can't quite imagine what it must be like. The wonder of 
performing miracles should bring enough happiness; to have God inside you must be the 
highest joy. Yet it isn't. By the smallest hair there is a distance to go. Amazingly, in that 
fraction of distance an entire world will be created. 


STAGE SEVEN: 

GOD OF PURE BEING— "I AM" 
(Sacred Response) 


There is a God who can only be experienced by going beyond experience. 

Down below us, the river was as pure as green crystal. The mountain road was winding, so 
much that I didn't look at the water despite its beauty, for fear of missing our landmark — a 
door on the side of the cliff. Unlikely though it was, that's what we were told to look for. But 
what cliff? The Ganges cuts a roaring gorge a hundred miles from its source in the Himalayas, 
and cliffs were everywhere. 

"Wait, I think that's it!" someone cried from the backseat. The last bend in the road had 
swung us close to the edge of the canyon. Peering over it, one could just spy a narrow dirt trail 
leading — it was true — to a door in the cliff. We pulled onto the shoulder of the road and the 
five of us jumped out, scrambling down the trail to find whoever had the key. We had been 
told to look for an old saint, a bearded ascetic who had lived here for many years. At the end 
of the track was a rickety hut but no saint inside it, only a teenage monk who politely said that 
his master wouldn't be available for hours. What about the key? He shook his head. Then we 
saw that the door to the holy cave was so rotted that the lock had fallen off. Could we go 
inside, then? He shrugged. "Why not?" 

The door was not only unlocked but falling off its hinges. I pulled it open with a creak; 
inside was a tunnel. We snaked in a line through the darkness, and the tunnel got lower and 
narrower, like a mine shaft. It seemed to go on for a hundred yards before opening out into a 
proper cave where you could stand up straight again. We had no lights with us, and only the 
faintest glimmer of sunlight still penetrated from the outside world. 

The teenage monk had exacted a promise of total silence once we entered the cave. 
Meditation had taken place here for several thousand years, ever since the great sage 
Vasishtha had stopped by in legendary times. You could feel it immediately. Vasishtha was 
the tutor to Prince Rama, an awesome duty considering that Rama was a god. 

So here we were, not just in a sacred place but in a holy of holies. I have the misfortune of 
generally missing out on holiness. Many of India's saints strike me with less than wonder, and 
I have sat through a number of mystical initiations — such as the one where a woman saint 
opened the sacred spot on the top of my skull to let a stream of air blow out from the crown — 
without feeling a thing. In this cave, however, I felt that the world was disappearing. After a 
moment I could hardly remember the winding road above the Ganges; a few minutes more on 
the cold stone floor with eyes closed, and our whole holiday trip faded away. 

This was a good place to meet the God of stage seven, who is known when all else is 
forgotten. Each person is tied to the world by a thousand invisible threads of mental activity — 
time, place, identity, and all past experiences. In the dark I began to lose more of these 
threads. Could I go far enough to forget myself? "Everything about you is a fragment," a guru 
told his disciples. "Your mind accumulates these fragments from moment to moment. When 



you think you know something, you refer only to some scrap of the past. Can such a mind 
ever know the whole? Obviously not." 

The God of stage seven is holistic — he encompasses everything. To know him, you would 
have to possess a mind to match. One day on a walk the philosopher Jean-Jacques Rousseau 
was kicked unconscious by a horse, and when he came to he found himself in a strange state; 
it seemed as if the world had no boundaries and he was a speck of consciousness floating in a 
vast ocean. This "oceanic feeling" — a phrase also used by Freud — was impersonal; Rousseau 
felt fused with everything — the earth, the sky, everyone around him. He felt ecstatic and free 
in that state, which quickly passed and yet left a strong impression that haunted him for the 
rest of his life. 

In Vasishtha's cave, individuals have sought the same feeling for millennia, and so was I. 
This involved nothing I was consciously doing. It was more like a memory lapse. Everyone's 
mind is like an automated wake-up device in a hotel, which never stops sending its reminders. 
Mine chums with a thousand scraps of memory related to who I am. Some are about my 
family or my job, others are about the car and the house, the plane tickets, the luggage, the 
half-empty gas tank — the whole tapestry of life that somehow doesn't add up to a whole. 

As my mind revolves and buzzes with this data, it keeps assuring me that I am real. Why 
do I need this assurance? No one asks this question as long as the world is with us. We blend 
into the scenery and accept its reality. But put anyone in Vasishtha's cave and the bits and 
pieces of identity will stop coming up so much. The glitter of memory ceases its dazzling 
flicker and then you cut to the chase ... which is? 

Nothing. A void with no activity. God. 

To find God in an empty room — to find the ultimate God in an empty room — is the 
experience that miracle workers sacrifice all their powers for. In place of the highest ecstasy, 
one gets emptiness. The God of stage seven is so intangible that he can be defined by no 
qualities. Nothing remains to hold on to. In the ancient Indian tradition, they define this aspect 
of spirit only by negation. In stage seven God is 

Unborn 

Undying 

Unchanging 

Unmoving 

Unmanifest 

Immeasurable 

Invisible 

Intangible 

Infinite 

This God cannot be thought of even as a great light, and therefore to many Westerners he 
may seem like death. But "lifeless" isn’t one of the negatives that describe him. The empty 
void contains the potential for all life and all experience. The one positive quality that can be 
attached to God in stage seven is existence, or pure being. No matter how blank the void gets, 
it still exists, and that is enough to give birth to the universe. 

The mystery of stage seven is that nothingness can mask infinity. If we had jumped to this 
stage at the outset, proving the reality of such a God would not have been possible. You have 
to climb the spiritual ladder from one rung to the next. Now that we are high enough to view 
the whole landscape, it's time to kick the ladder away. No support at all, not even the mind, is 
needed. 

For stage seven to be real, there must be a corresponding response in the brain. 

Subjectively we know that there is, because in every age people report the experience of 



unity, in which the observer collapses into the observed. In cases of autism a patient may 
blend so completely into the world that he has to cling to a tree to make sure that it exists; the 
poet Wordsworth had just this experience as a child. He referred to "spots of time" in which 
an unearthly sensation made him feel suspended in immortality. In those moments he still 
existed, but not as a creature of time and place. 

Brain researchers have caught epileptic seizures on their scans, another instance where 
patients report unearthly feelings and losing identity. But such examples do not account for 
the sacred response, as I will call it. Altered brain waves and subjective reports do not capture 
the mind's ability to comprehend wholeness. Objectively this state goes beyond miracles in 
that the person does nothing to affect reality except look at it, yet in that looking the laws of 
nature shift more profoundly than in miracles. 

Let me hasten to give an example. Recently a paranormal investigator named Marilyn 
Schlitz wanted to test if anything like second sight was real. Schlitz chose the phenomenon of 
just turning around to discover that you were being watched from behind, which she called 
"covert observation." She took a group of subjects and looked at them through a video camera 
in another room. By turning the camera off and on, she could test whether each person was 
aware of being watched, even with the observer not physically present. Rather than relying 
upon subjective guesses, she used an instrument resembling a lie detector; it measured even 
the faintest changes in the skin's response to electrical current. 

The experiment was a success — up to two-thirds of the subjects showed changes in skin 
conductivity while being observed from a distance. Schlitz announced the success of her 
experiment, only to find that another researcher who tried to duplicate it failed miserably. He 
used exactly the same methods, but in his laboratory almost no one responded with second 
sight; they couldn't tell the difference between being watched and not being watched. Schlitz 
was baffled but confident enough to invite the second researcher to come to her lab. The two 
of them ran the experiment again, choosing subjects at the last moment to ensure that there 
was no tampering. 

Again Schlitz obtained her results, but when she consulted her colleague, he had obtained 
nothing. This was an extraordinary moment. How could two people ran the same objective 
test with such dramatically different results? The only viable answer, as Schlitz saw it, must 
lie in the researcher himself. The outcome depended on who you are. As far as I know, this is 
as close as anyone has come to verifying that observer and observation can collapse into one. 
This fusion lies at the heart of the sacred response, because in unity all separation ends. 

We have other clues to the reality of this response, some negative and some positive. The 
negative clues center on the "shyness syndrome," in which strange phenomena refuse to be 
photographed. Everything from ghosts to the bending of keys to UFO abductions are attested 
to by people who have no trouble passing lie-detector tests, yet when the time comes to 
photograph these phenomena, they don't show up. Positive clues come from experiments like 
the classic ones performed at the Princeton engineering department in the 1970s, where 
subjects were asked to stare at a machine that randomly spit out zeros and ones (known as a 
random number generator). Their task was to use their minds to sway the machine to generate 
more ones than zeros, or vice versa. No one touched the machine or changed its software 
program. 

The results were surprising. Using nothing but focused attention, most people could in fact 
significantly influence the outcome. Instead of spewing out exactly equal numbers of zeros 
and ones, the machine skewed 5 percent or more away from randomness. The reason that 
Schlitz's test goes even further is that she wanted a random trial in the interest of being 
unbiased, but she got skewed results anyway, depending on who was running the test. 

The sacred response is the last step in this direction. It supports the notion that there is no 
observer separate from the observation. Everything around us is the product of who we are. In 



stage seven you no longer project God; you project everything, which is the same as being in 
the movie, outside the move, and the movie itself. In unity consciousness no separation is left. 
We no longer create God in our image, not even the faintest image of a holy ghost. 

Who am I? ... 

The source. 

A person who reaches stage seven is so free of attachment that if you ask, "Who are you?" 
the only answer is: "I am." This is the very answer that Jehovah gave Moses in the book of 
Exodus when he spoke from the burning bush. Moses was herding sheep on the side of a 
mountain when God appeared. He was awestruck but also troubled that no one would believe 
him about talking with God. If Moses was going to be a holy messenger, at least he needed 
God's name, but when asked what it was, God replied, "I am that I am." 

To equate God with existence seems to strip him of power and majesty and knowledge. 

But our quantum model tells us otherwise. At the virtual level there is no energy, time, or 
space. This apparent void, however, is the source of everything measurable as energy, time, 
and space, just as a blank mind is the source of all thoughts. Sir Isaac Newton believed that 
the universe was literally God's blank mind, and all of the stars and galaxies were his 
thoughts. 

If God has a home, it has to be in the void. Otherwise he would be limited. Can we really 
know such a boundless deity? In stage seven two impossible things must converge. The 
person has to be reduced to the merest point, a speck of identity closing the last minuscule gap 
between himself and God. At the same time, just when separation is healed, the tiny point has 
to expand to infinity. The mystics describe this as "the One becomes All." To put it into 
scientific terms, when you cross into the quantum zone, space-time collapses into itself. The 
tiniest thing in existence merges with the greatest; point and infinity are equal. 

If you can get the skeptical mind to believe in this state (which isn’t easy) the obvious 
question is "So what?" The process really does sound like dying, because no matter how you 
approach it, one must give up the known world to attain stage seven. The miracle worker in 
stage six is already detached, but he retains inner joy and whatever faint intentions that 
motivate him to perform his miracles. In stage seven there is no joy, compassion, light, or 
truth. The end of the chase is the ultimate gamble. You don't play for all or nothing; you play 
for all and nothing. 

The problem with models is that they are always inadequate; they select a portion of reality 
and leave the rest behind. How do you find a model for All and Nothing? The Chinese called 
it the Tao, meaning the offstage presence that gives the world life, shape, purpose, and flow. 
Rumi uses the same image: 

There is someone who looks after us 

From behind the curtain. 

In truth we are not here 

This is our shadow. 

In stage seven you go behind the screen and join whoever is there. This is the source. The 
spiritual journey takes you to the place where you began as a soul, a mere point of 
consciousness, naked and undressed of qualities. This source is yourself. "I am" is what you 
can say to describe it, just as God did. To imagine what it feels like in stage seven, be with me 
in Vasishtha's cave. As I forgot everything else, I didn't forget to be. In that unattached state 
there is nothing to hold on to as a label or description: 

1 . You don't think about time. A God of pure being is unborn and undying. 



2. You have no desire to pursue anything. A God of pure being is unchanging. 

3. Stillness envelops you. A God of pure being is unmoving. 

4. Nothing in your mind comes to the surface. A God of pure being is unmanifest. 

5. You can't locate yourself with the five senses. A God of pure being is invisible and 
intangible. 

6. You seem to be nowhere and everywhere at once. A God of pure being is infinite. 

Common sense tells us that if you take away all qualities, nothing is left, and nothing 
doesn't seem very useful. Even when people can be talked into giving up pleasure because, as 
the Buddha argued, it is always tied to pain, most Westerners go away and take up pleasure 
again. The argument for stage seven has to be made in more persuasive ways. First of all, no 
one forces this final realization upon you. Second, it doesn't wipe out ordinary existence — you 
still eat, drink, walk, and act out desires. But now the desires do not belong to anyone; they 
are remnants of who you used to be. So who did you use to be? 

The answer is karma. Until you become pure being, your identity is wrapped up in a cycle 
of desires that lead to actions, every action leaves an impression, and impressions give rise to 
new desires. (When the potato chip commercial says, "Bet you can't eat just one," the 
mechanism of desire-action-impression is at work.) This cycle is the classic interpretation of 
karma. Everyone is caught up in it, for the simple reason that we all desire things. What is 
wrong with that? The great sages point out that nothing is wrong with karma except that it 
isn't real. If you watch a puppy chasing its tail, you see pure karma. The puppy is absorbed, 
but it isn't getting anywhere. The tail is always just out of reach, and even if the animal snaps 
it in his jaws, the pain will make him let go again, starting the chase all over. Karma means 
always wanting more of what won't get you anywhere in the first place. In stage seven you 
realize this and no longer chase after phantoms. Now you end up at the source, which is pure 
being. 


How do I fit in? ... 

I am. 

Once the adventure of soul-searching is over, things calm down. The state of "I am" 
forgoes pain and pleasure. Because all desire is centered on pain and pleasure, it comes as a 
surprise to find out that what I wanted all along was just to be. There are many kinds of 
worthwhile lives to lead. Is it worthwhile to lead the life of "I am"? In stage seven you include 
all the previous stages. Therefore you can live any way you want. By analogy, think of the 
world as a movie that includes everything; you cannot tell in any way that it is a movie; 
therefore, everyone behaves as if the scenario is real. 

If you suddenly woke up and realized that nothing around you was real, what would you 
do? First of all, certain things would happen involuntarily. You wouldn’t be able to take other 
people's dramas seriously. The smallest irritants and the greatest tragedies, a pebble in your 
shoe and World War II, become equally unreal. Your detachment might set you apart, but you 
could keep it to yourself. 

Motivation would also vanish, because there's nothing to achieve in a dreamworld. Poverty 
is as good as a million dollars when it's all play money. Emotional attachments would also 
drop away, since no one's personality is real anymore. After you consider all these changes, 
not much choice is left. The end of illusion is the end of experience as we know it. What do 
you receive in exchange? Only reality, pure and unvarnished. 



In India they tell a fable about this: There was once a great devotee of Vishnu who prayed 
night and day to see his God. One night his wish was granted and Vishnu appeared to him. 
Falling on his knees, the devotee cried out, "I will do anything for you, my Lord, just ask." 

"How about a drink of water?" Vishnu replied. 

Although surprised by the request, the devotee immediately ran to the river as fast as his 
legs could cany him. When he got there and knelt to dip up some water, he saw a beautiful 
woman standing on an island in the middle of the river. The devotee fell madly in love on the 
spot. He grabbed a boat and rowed over to her. She responded to him, and the two were 
married. They had children in a house on the island; the devotee grew rich and old plying his 
trade as a merchant. Many years later, a typhoon came along and devastated the island. The 
merchant was swept away in the storm. He nearly drowned but regained consciousness on the 
very spot where he had once begged to see God. His whole life, including his house, wife, and 
children, seemed never to have happened. 

Suddenly he looked over his shoulder, only to see Vishnu standing there in all his radiance. 

"Well," Vishnu said, "did you find me a glass of water?" 

The moral of the story is that you shouldn't pay so much attention to the movie. In stage 
seven there is a shift of balance; one starts to notice the unchanging much more than the 
changing. In the Sermon on the Mount Jesus called this "storing up treasure in heaven." But 
again analogies fail. Stage seven isn't a prize or reward for making right choices; it is the 
realization of what you always have been. If someone asks "Who are you?" every answer is 
misleading except "I am" — which means that we are all misled, even the miracle workers. We 
are the victims of mistaken identity. Our time has been spent projecting versions of reality, 
including versions of God, that are inadequate. 

How do I find God? ... 

By transcending. 

Whatever it takes to get beyond illusion and back to reality, it's a bumpy landing when you 
get there. In fact, those few yogis and sages who have spoken about entering stage seven 
report that their first reaction was one of total loss. The comfort of illusion was stripped away. 
These are people who had reveled in ecstasy, miracles, deep insight, and intimacy with God. 
Yet those experiences too were misleading. Leaving all of it behind, at a deeper level they 
now knew that something good had happened. Like sloughing off an old skin, they 
transcended to a new life and a new level of existence because the old life had simply 
withered. 

Transcending is going beyond. In spiritual terms it also means growing up. "When I was 
no longer a child, I put aside childish things," writes Saint Paul. By analogy, even karma can 
be outgrown and put aside. Here is the argument for that: Two ultimate realities vie for our 
approval. One is karma, the reality of actions and desires. Karma is played out in the material 
world, forcing us to run on the same treadmill over and over. The other reality that claims to 
be ultimate has no action in it; it just is. This reality is exemplified by the open, detached, 
peaceful state of deep meditation. Few people accept it, and those who do generally stay 
outside society as renunciates and ascetics. 

However, to see yourself caught between two choices is false. "Ultimate reality" means the 
one and only; the winner swallows up the loser. So if you put your money on the loser, you 
have made a mistake that will cost you dearly. Eventually you will see that you have bought 
shadow for substance; your desires were ghostly wisps leading you down wrong paths. As one 
Vedic master put it, "The world of karma is infinite, but you will discover that it is a boring 
infinity. The other infinity is never boring." 



The reason, then, to return to the source derives from self-interest. I don't want to be bored; 
I don't want to come to the end of the chase and wind up empty-handed. Here all metaphors 
and analogies end, because just as a dream gets exposed as illusion when you wake up, so 
Being eventually unmasks karma. Strip away the unreal and by definition all that remains 
must be real. The soul's journey isn't a game, a chase, or a gamble. It follows a predetermined 
course toward the moment of waking up. 

Along the way tiny moments of waking up foreshadow the final event. I might be able to 
illustrate this through a story. When I was ten our family lived in the hill station of Shillong, 
within reach of the Himalayas, and my father had an aide called Baba Sahib who cleaned his 
shoes and washed his clothes. Baba was a Muslim and a strong believer in the supernatural. 
Whenever he went down to the dhobi ghat, or wash place by the river, he pounded the clothes 
next to a cemetery. Baba was certain that ghosts inhabited the place and proved it by hanging 
the wet clothes on the gravestones. If they dried in less than half an hour, Baba knew that a 
ghost would be seen in the cemetery that night. 

To prove it, he sneaked me out of the house and told me a story about a mother and child 
who were the primary haunters, both dying young under tragic circumstances. The two of us 
sat among the graves for two hours, I grew sleepy and afraid at the same time, but as we were 
leaving, Baba pointed in the distance. 

"See — see there?" he cried. 

And I did see — two pale apparitions floated above one of the gravestones. I rushed home 
in great excitement and told no one. After a day the secret was too hard to keep, so I told the 
safest person in the house, my grandmother. "Do you think I just imagined it?" I asked, 
hoping she would either confirm my vision or be amazed by it. 

"What does it matter?" she said with a shrug. "The whole universe is imagined. Your 
ghosts are just as real as that." 

At its source, the cosmos is equally real and unreal. The only way I have of knowing 
anything is through the neurons firing in my brain, and although they might take me to such a 
fine degree of perception that I could see every photon inside my cortex, at that point the 
cortex dissolves into photons as well. So the observer and the thing he is trying to observe 
merge, which is exactly how the chase after God also ends. 

What is the nature of good and evil? ... 

Good is the union of all opposites. 

Evil no longer exists. 

The shadow of evil stalks behind goodness up to the last moment. Only when it is totally 
absorbed into unity does the threat of evil end once and for all. The story of Jesus reaches its 
poignant climax in the garden of Gethsemane, when he prays that the cup be taken from his 
hands. He knows that the Romans are going to capture and kill him, and the prospect gives 
rise to a terrible moment of doubt. It is one of the loneliest and most wrenching moments in 
the New Testament — and it is utterly imaginary. 

The text itself tells us that Jesus had walked apart from everyone else and that his disciples 
had fallen asleep. Therefore no one could have overheard what he said, particularly if he was 
praying. I think that this last temptation was projected onto him by writers of the gospel. 

Why? Because they couldn’t conceive of his situation except through their own. They viewed 
Christ across a gap, the same gap that keeps us from imagining how all fear, temptation, sin, 
evil, and imperfection could be transcended. Yet this is what happens in stage seven. 

Religions have a hard time being funny, and in the Middle Ages people didn't see much 
humor in the soul's journey. They were too aware of death, disease, Satan's temptations, and 
the many woes in this vale of tears. The church underscored these horrors, and about the only 



escape was on holidays when a rough plank stage was erected outside the cathedral. Upon it 
miracle plays were performed, and then Satan wasn't so frightening because he could be 
played as a clown. The same people who trembled at the prospect of sin now witnessed the 
devil taking pratfalls. In those moments, the church was teaching a new lesson: evil itself 
must be redeemed. History comes to an end here on earth when Satan is accepted back into 
heaven; then the triumph of God becomes complete. 

On the personal level, you can’t afford to have the last laugh until stage seven. As long as 
the mind is caught up in choices, some are going to turn out worse than others. We all equate 
pain with evil, and as a sensation, pain doesn’t end; it is part of our biological inheritance. The 
only way to get beyond it is to transcend, and that is accomplished by attaining a higher point 
of view. In stage seven all versions of the world are seen as projections, and a projection is 
nothing more than a point of view that has come to life. The highest point of view, then, 
would encompass anything that happens, without preference and without rejection. 

I was starkly confronted by this possibility on two occasions when evil stood on my 
doorstep. The first occurred in the early 1970s when I was a struggling resident living in a 
seedy part of Boston. My wife had gone out, leaving me in charge of our infant daughter. It 
was getting late when the door to our apartment flew open, and a very big, menacing man 
strode in. He didn't say anything. My head swiveled around, and before I was even aware that 
he was carrying a baseball bat, I jumped up and grabbed it. Neither of us spoke. In less than a 
second I had swung the bat and hit him on the head, knocking him unconscious. A few 
seconds later my heart was pounding with adrenaline, but at the instant I acted, I wasn't 
myself — the action didn't belong to me. 

Naturally a great deal of turmoil resulted, and when the police arrived it was quickly 
discovered that the man was a released felon with a history of assault and suspected murder. I 
had acted perfectly correctly, even though at a conscious level I have a strong commitment to 
nonviolence. 

But the story isn’t complete. Two years ago I had just finished a lecture in a southern city 
and happened to exit from the hall by a back door into an alley. This looked like the shortest 
route back to my hotel, but waiting for me were three gang youths. One pulled a gun and held 
it to my temple. When he demanded my wallet, I suddenly knew what to say. 

"Look, I can give you my bills but not my credit cards," I told him in a calm voice, holding 
out the money. "You don't want to shoot me over two hundred dollars. That would be murder, 
and it will follow you the rest of your life. So just drop your weapon and go, okay?" 

It amazed me to be saying these words; it was as though I were standing there watching 
myself. The youth's hand was shaking, and the three of them looked undecided. All at once I 
shouted, "Go!" at the top of my lungs. The gun fell at my feet, and the three of them ran away. 

Two scenes of evil, two different reactions. I offer them as evidence that something inside 
us already transcends the present situation. Where we see the play of opposites, our inner 
awareness takes every moment as unique. I haven't told quite the whole story about the 
second incident. In my bargaining, I also promised the youths that I would not tell the police, 
and I never did. One act of potential violence was met with violence, the other with pacifism. 

I can't explain my choices except to say that they weren't chosen. The actions performed 
themselves. Justice was served in both cases, acted out from beyond my limited point of view. 
In stage seven a person realizes that it isn't up to us to balance the scales; if we hand our 
choices over to God, we are free to act as the impulse moves us, knowing its source is divine 
unity. 


What is my life challenge? ... 
To be myself. 



Nothing would seem easier than to be yourself, but people complain endlessly about how 
hard it is. When you are little your parents won't let you be yourself. They have different ideas 
about eating the whole chocolate cake or drawing on the walls with crayons. Later on teachers 
keep you from being yourself. Then teenage peer pressure takes over, and finally, once 
society has imposed its demands, freedom is more restricted still. Alone on a desert island you 
might be able to be yourself, only guilt and shame would pursue you even there. The 
inheritance of repression is inescapable. 

The whole problem is one of boundaries and resistance. Someone imposes a limit on you, 
and you resist it in order to break free. Thus "being myself becomes a relative thing. Unless 
someone tells me what I can't do, I have nothing to push against. By implication, my life 
would be shapeless. I would follow one whim after another, which itself is a kind of prison. 

To have a hundred wives and a feast on the table isn't being yourself, it is being your desires. 

In stage seven the problem comes to an end as boundaries and resistance both melt. To be 
in unity, you cannot have limitations. You are wholeness; that is what fills your perception. 
Choice A and choice B are equal in your eyes. When this is true, desire can flow where it will. 
Sometimes you get to eat the whole cake, have the hundred wives, and walk on the grass. But 
being deprived of these fulfillments is just as good. I am not my desires. Being myself no 
longer has the slightest outside reference. 

Doesn't this deprive me of choice? Both yes and no. In stage seven there are still 
preferences. A person will want to dress and talk a certain way; there may even be decided 
likes and dislikes. Yet these are karmic holdovers from the past. Because I speak English and 
Hindi, come from a doctor’s family, do a lot of traveling, and write books, those influences 
could well persist into stage seven. But they would recede into the background, turning into 
the wallpaper of my real existence, which is simply to be. 

How would I be able to tell that such a state is real? The skeptic who looks at stage seven 
would claim that unity is just a form of self-deception. All this talk about All and Nothing 
doesn't erase the necessities of this world, and in fact the greatest mystics do preserve the 
trappings of ordinary life. The problem of self-deception seems trickier still when you realize 
that the ego, in its need to continue as the center of all activity, has no trouble pretending to 
gain enlightenment. 

One is reminded of the story of the saffron monk: A young man in India used to attend a 
discussion group with his friends. They considered themselves to be serious seekers, and their 
discussions ran to esoteric subjects about the soul, the existence of afterlife, and so on. 

One night the talk grew very heated and the young man stepped outside for some air. 

When he returned to the room, he saw a monk in saffron robes sitting off to the side. No one 
else in the room seemed to notice this. The young man took his place, saying nothing. The 
arguments continued in loud voices, but still the monk sat silently and no one took any notice. 
It was after midnight when the young man got up to go; to his surprise the saffron monk got 
up and followed. For the entire walk home in the moonlight the monk kept him company, and 
when the young man woke up the next morning, the monk was waiting by the bed in the 
young mans room. 

Perhaps because he was so spiritual, this vision didn't frighten the young man or make him 
fear for his sanity. He was delighted to have the peaceful presence of the monk around him. 
For the next week they remained constant companions, despite the fact that no one else saw 
anything. Eventually the young man had to tell his story to someone; he chose the teacher J. 
Krishnamurti (from whose writings I got the story). 

"First of all, this vision means everything to me," the young man began. "But I'm not the 
kind of person who needs symbols and images to worship. I reject religion — only Buddhism 
ever interested me because of its purity, but even there I didn't find enough to make me want 
to follow it." 



"I understand," Krishnamurti said. "So what is your question?" 

"I want to know if this figure is real or just a figment of my mind. 1 have to know the 
truth." 

"You said it has brought you a great deal of meaning?" 

The young man grew enthusiastic. "1 have undergone a profound transformation. I feel 
joyful and at peace." 

"Is the monk with you now?" Krishnamurti asked. The young man nodded, but hesitantly. 

"To be quite honest," he said, "the monk is starting to fade. He is not so vivid as at first." 

"Are you afraid of losing him?" 

Anxiety showed in the young man's face. "What do you mean? I came here wanting the 
truth, but 1 don't want you to take him away. Don’t you realize how this vision has consumed 
me? In order to have peace and joy, 1 think about this vision, and they come to me." 

Krishnamurti replied, "Living in the past, however pleasant and uplifting, prevents the 
experience of what is. The mind finds it difficult not to live in a thousand yesterdays. Take 
this figure you cherish. The memory of it inspires you, delights you, and gives you a sense of 
release. But it is only the dead inspiring the living." 

The young man looked crestfallen and glum. "So it wasn't real after all?" 

"The mind is complicated," said Krishnamurti. "ft gets conditioned by the past and by how 
it would like things to be. Does it really matter if this figure is real or projected?" 

"No," the young man admitted. "It only matters that it has shown me so much." 

"Has it? It didn't reveal to you the working of your own mind, and you became a prisoner 
of your experience. If I may say so, this vision brought fear into your life because you were 
afraid to lose it. Greed also came in because you wanted to hoard the experience. Thus you 
lost the one thing this vision might have brought you: self-knowledge. Without that, every 
experience is an illusion." 

I find this a beautiful and moving tale, worth recounting at length. Before stage seven the 
full value of being yourself isn't known. Experience can be shaped to bring great inspiration. 
But in the end this isn't enough. Every divine image remains an image; every vision tempts us 
to hold on to it. To be really free, there is no option except to be yourself. You are the living 
center around which every event happens, yet no event is so important that you willingly give 
yourself up to it. By being yourself you open the door to what is, the never-ending play of 
cosmic intelligence curving back to know itself again and again. In this way life remains fresh 
and fulfills its need to renew itself at every moment. 

What is my greatest strength? ... 

Unity. 

What is my biggest hurdle? ... 

Duality. 

Like every other stage, this one must ripen. Many people have had flashes of unity, but 
that isn't the same as living there permanently. A flash of unity can feel like bleeding into the 
scenery, but unlike autism, which can make a child lose the boundary of identity, the 
experience is positive — the self expands and achieves a higher vision. Instead of needing to 
intuit anything, you simply are that thing. Stage seven brings the ultimate form of empathy. 

The opposite of unity is duality. Currently two dominant versions of reality are believed by 
almost everyone. Version one: there is only the material world, and nothing can be real that 
doesn't obey physical laws. Version two: two realities exist, the earthly and the divine. 

Version one is called the secular view, and even religious people adopt it for everyday use. 
Yet total belief in materialism, as we have seen, has become unacceptable for a host of 



reasons. It cannot explain credible, witnessed miracles, near-death experiences, out-of-body 
experiences, the testimony of millions of people who have had answered prayers, and most 
convincing of all, the discovery of the quantum world, which doesn't obey any ordinary 
physical laws. 

The second version of reality is less rigid. It allows for spiritual experience and miracles, 
which exist on the fringes of the material world. At this moment someone is hearing the voice 
of God, witnessing the Virgin Mary, or going into the light. These experiences still leave the 
material world intact and essentially untouched. You can have God and a Mercedes at the 
same time, each on its own level. In other words, there is duality. 

Many religions, Christianity being a prime example, declare that God sits in heaven, 
unapproachable except by faith, prayer, death, or the intervention of saints. Yet this dualism 
falls apart once we heal the divisions between body, mind, and spirit. Duality is another word 
for separation, and in the state of separation, many illusions crop up. Steam and ice, sunlight 
and electricity, bone and blood are examples of things that seem totally different until you 
know the laws of transformation, which turn one form into another. This holds true for body 
and soul as well. In separation they cannot be more different, until you find the laws that 
transform invisible, immortal, uncreated spirit into flesh. 

In India there has been a strong nondual tradition for thousands of years, known as 
Vedanta. The word literally means "the end of the Vedas," the point where no sacred texts can 
help you anymore, where teaching stops and awareness dawns. "How do you know God is 
real?" a disciple once asked his gum. 

The gum replied, "I look around and see the natural order of creation. There is tremendous 
beauty in the simplest things. One feels alive and awake before the infinite majesty of the 
cosmos, and the deeper one looks, the more astounding this creation is. What more is 
needed?" 

"But none of that proves anything," the disciple protested. 

The gum shook his head. "You only say that because you aren't truly looking. If you could 
see a mountain or a rain cloud for one minute without your doubts blocking the way, the 
evidence of God would be revealed instantly." 

"Then tell me what is revealed," the disciple insisted. "After all, I have the same eyes as 
you." 

"Something simple, undivided, unborn, eternal, solid as stone, boundless, independent, 
invulnerable, blissful, and all-knowing," the gum replied. 

The disciple felt a msh of despair. "You see all that? Then I will give up, for I can't 
possibly leam to perceive such a wonder." 

"No, you are wrong," the gum said. "We all see eternity in every direction, but we choose 
to cut it into bits and pieces of time and space. There is one quality of the All that should give 
you hope. It wants to share." 

If the divine mind wants to share itself with us and we are willing to accept, then the stage 
is set for unity. The main tenet of Vedanta is extremely simple — duality is too weak to stand 
forever. Take any sin or delusion, and in time it will come to an end. Take any pleasure, and 
in time it will start to pall. Take any depth of sleep, and in time you have to wake up. In 
Vedanta they say that the only real thing is eternal bliss consciousness (sat chit ananda). 

These words promise that the timeless waits for me when the temporary expires, bliss outlives 
pleasure, and being awake comes after sleep. In that simplicity the whole notion of duality 
collapses, revealing the unity behind all illusion. 


What is my greatest temptation? ... 
Beyond temptation. 



You can't be tempted when you have it all. It is even better when they can’t take it away 
from you. Vedanta is expressed in a famous saying, "I am That, You are That, and All this is 
That." When the ancient sages refer to "That," they are referring to an invisible but quite real 
power. It is the power of existence. You have it forever when you can say, "I am that power, 
you are that power, and everything around us is that power." Other words like grace, godhead, 
the light, alpha and omega work just as well — yet none of them equals the experience, which 
is very personal and totally universal at the same time. 

The sage Vasishtha was one of the first human beings to realize that we experience only 
the world we filter through our minds. Whatever I can imagine is a product of my life 
experience so far, and that is the tiniest fragment of what I could know. As Vasishtha himself 
wrote: 

Infinite worlds come and go 

in the vast expanse of consciousness, 

like motes of dust dancing in a beam of light. 

This is a reminder that if the material world is just a product of my awareness, so is 
heaven. I have every right, therefore, to try to know the mind of God. A journey that begins in 
mystery and silence ends with myself. 

In the holy cave I visited above the Ganges, only at the last moment did I get a hint that 
someone else was sharing the place with us. Our group was lost in the vast silence that 
blossomed there. It had become evident without a doubt that God existed, not as a person but 
as an infinite intelligence moving at infinite speed through infinite dimensions, a creator 
modern physics could come to terms with as well. But at that moment none of us had any 
thoughts. We got up to go, and in the dimness we sensed that we weren't alone. Peering into 
the gloom, we made out the faint shape of another person who had been there all the time — it 
was the old saint who couldn’t meet us with the key when we arrived. Sitting in lotus position, 
he hadn’t stirred when we entered and didn't stir now. 

We left quietly, and as we emerged into the blinding daylight, what we had shared started 
to fade. My mind began churning again. Words that first sounded like harsh cymbal clashes 
became normal within a few minutes. The usual distractions grabbed hold. But some flavor of 
that cave remained with me for weeks in the form of a quiet certainty that nothing was ever 
going to go wrong again. This is not nearly the same as being unborn, eternal, hard as stone, 
boundless, invulnerable, blissful, and all-knowing. Yet I am closer to it, nearer to the source. 
For once my mind jumped off the ledge of everyday life and landed in a good place, where 
struggle isn't necessary, I opened the door on the side of eternity. Now I can fully appreciate 
Rumi's words: 

When I die I shall soar with angels, 

And when I die to the angels, what I shall become, 

You cannot imagine. 



GOD IS AS WE ARE 


WHO IS GOD? 

Stage One: Fight-or-Flight Response: God the Protector 
Vengeful 
Capricious 
Quick to anger 
Jealous 

Judgmental — meting out reward and punishment 

Unfathomable 

Sometimes merciful 

Stage Two: Reactive Response: God the Almighty 
Sovereign 
Omnipotent 
Just 

Answerer of prayers 

Impartial 

Rational 

Organized into rules 

Stage Three: Restful Awareness Response: God of Peace 
Detached 
Calm 

Offering consolation 

Undemanding 

Conciliatory 

Silent 

Meditative 

Stage Four: Intuitive Response: God the Redeemer 
Understanding 
Tolerant 
Forgiving 
Nonjudgmental 
Inclusive 
Accepting 

Stage Five: Creative Response: God the Creator 
Unlimited creative potential 
Control over space and time 
Abundant 
Open 
Generous 

Willing to be known 
Inspired 

Stage Six: Visionary Response: God of Miracles 
Transformative 
Mystical 



Enlightened 

Beyond all causes 

Existing 

Healing 

Magical 

Alchemist 

Stage Seven: Sacred Response: God of Pure Being — "I Am " 
Unborn 
Undying 
Unchanging 
Unmoving 
Unmanifest 
Immeasurable 
Invisible 
Intangible 
Infinite 


WHAT KIND OF WORLD DID GOD CREATE? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: World of bare survival 

Stage 2: Reactive Response: World of competition and ambition 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: World of inner solitude, self-sufficiency 

Stage 4: Intuitive Response: World of insight, personal growth 

Stage 5: Creative Response: World of art, invention, discovery 

Stage 6: Visionary Response: World of prophets, sages, and seers 

Stage 7: Sacred Response: Transcendent world 


WHO AM I? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: A survivor 
Stage 2: Reactive Response: Ego, personality 
Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: Silent witness 
Stage 4: Intuitive Response: Knower within 
Stage 5: Creative Response: Co-creator 
Stage 6: Visionary Response: Enlightened awareness 
Stage 7: Sacred Response: The source 


HOW DO I FIT IN? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: I cope. 

Stage 2: Reactive Response: I win. 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: I stay centered. 
Stage 4: Intuitive Response: I understand. 

Stage 5: Creative Response: I intend. 



Stage 6: Visionary Response: I love. 
Stage 7: Sacred Response: I am. 


HOW DO I FIND GOD? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: Fear, loving devotion 
Stage 2: Reactive Response: Awe, obedience 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: Meditation, silent contemplation 

Stage 4: Intuitive Response: Self-acceptance 

Stage 5: Creative Response: Inspiration 

Stage 6: Visionary Response: Grace 

Stage 7: Sacred Response: By transcending 


WHAT IS THE NATURE OF GOOD AND EVIL? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response 

Good is safety, comfort, food, shelter and family. 

Evil is physical threat and abandonment. 

Stage 2: Reactive Response 

Good is getting what you want. 

Evil is any obstacle to getting what you want. 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response 

Good is clarity, inner calm, and contact with the self. 

Evil is inner turmoil and chaos. 

Stage 4: Intuitive Response 

Good is clarity, seeing the truth. 

Evil is blindness, denying the truth. 

Stage 5: Creative Response 
Good is higher consciousness. 

Evil is lower consciousness. 

Stage 6: Visionary Response 
Good is a cosmic force. 

Evil is another aspect of the same force. 

Stage 7: Sacred Response 

Good is the union of all opposites. 

Evil no longer exists. 


WHAT IS MY LIFE CHALLENGE? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: To survive, protect, and maintain 

Stage 2: Reactive Response: Maximum achievement 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: To be engaged and detached 

Stage 4: Intuitive Response: To go beyond duality 

Stage 5: Creative Response: To align with the Creator 



Stage 6: Visionary Response: To attain liberation 
Stage 7: Sacred Response: To be myself 


WHAT IS MY GREATEST STRENGTH? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: Courage 
Stage 2: Reactive Response: Accomplishment 
Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: Autonomy 
Stage 4: Intuitive Response: Insight 
Stage 5: Creative Response: Imagination 
Stage 6: Visionary Response: Floliness 
Stage 7: Sacred Response: Unity 


WHAT IS MY BIGGEST HURDLE? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: Fear of loss, abandonment 

Stage 2: Reactive Response: Guilt, victimization 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: Fatalism 

Stage 4: Intuitive Response: Delusion 

Stage 5: Creative Response: Self-importance 

Stage 6: Visionary Response: False idealism 

Stage 7: Sacred Response: Duality 


WHAT IS MY GREATEST TEMPTATION? 

Stage 1: Fight-or-Flight Response: Tyranny 

Stage 2: Reactive Response: Addiction 

Stage 3: Restful Awareness Response: Introversion 

Stage 4: Intuitive Response: Deception 

Stage 5: Creative Response: Solipsism 

Stage 6: Visionary Response: Martyrdom 

Stage 7: Sacred Response: Beyond temptation 


GETTING WHAT YOU WANT 

The Seven Levels of Fulfillment 

God is another name for infinite intelligence. To achieve anything in life, a piece of this 
intelligence must be contacted and used. In other words, God is always there for you. The 
seven responses of the human brain are avenues to attain some aspect of God. Each level of 
fulfillment proves God's reality at that level. 



Level 1 (Fight-or-Flight Response) 

You fulfill your life through family, community, a sense of belonging, and material 
comforts. 

Level 2 (Reactive Response) 

You fulfill your life through success, power, influence, status, and other ego 
satisfactions. 

Level 3 (Restful Awareness Response) 

You fulfill your life through peace, centeredness, selfacceptance, and inner silence. 
Level 4 (Intuitive Response) 

You fulfill your life through insight, empathy, tolerance, and forgiveness. 

Level 5 (Creative Response) 

You fulfill your life through inspiration, expanded creativity in art or science, and 
unlimited discovery. 

Level 6 (Visionary Response) 

You fulfill your life through reverence, compassion, devoted service, and universal 
love. 

Level 7 (Sacred Response) 

You fulfill your life through wholeness and unity with the divine. 


The Seven Levels of Miracles 

A miracle is a display of power from beyond the five senses. Although all miracles take place 
in the transition zone, they differ from level to level. In general, miracles become more 
"supernatural" after the fourth or fifth brain response, but any miracle involves direct contact 
with spirit. 

Level 1 (Fight-or-Flight Response) 

Miracles involve surviving great danger, impossible rescues, a sense of divine 
protection. 

Example: A mother who runs into a burning house to rescue her child, or lifts a car 
with a child trapped underneath 

Level 2 (Reactive Response) 

Miracles involve incredible achievements and success, control over the body or mind. 
Example: Extreme feats of martial arts, child prodigies with inexplicable gifts in 
music or mathematics, the rise of a Napoleon from humble beginnings to immense 
power (men of destiny) 

Level 3 (Restful Awareness Response) 

Miracles involve synchronicity, yogic powers, premonitions, feeling the presence of 
God or angels. 



Example: Yogis who can change body temperature or heart rate at will, being visited 
by someone from far away who has just died, visitation by a guardian angel 

Level 4 (Intuitive Response) 

Miracles involve telepathy, ESP, knowledge of past or future lifetimes, prophetic 
powers. 

Example: Reading someone else's thoughts or aura, psychic predictions, astral 
projection to other locations 

Level 5 (Creative Response) 

Miracles involve divine inspiration, artistic genius, spontaneous fulfillment of desires 
(wishes come true). 

Example: The ceiling of the Sistine Chapel, having a thought that suddenly manifests, 
Einstein's insights into time and relativity 

Level 6 (Visionary Response) 

Miracles involve healing, physical transformations, holy apparitions, highest degree 
of supernatural feats. 

Example: Walking on water, healing incurable diseases through touch, direct 
revelation from the Virgin Mary 

Level 7 (Sacred Response) 

Miracles involve inner evidence of enlightenment. 

Example: Lives of the great prophets and teachers — Buddha, Jesus, Lao-Tze 


Four 

A MANUAL FOR SAINTS 


We are like newborn children, 
Our power is the power to grow. 
—RABINDRANATH TAGORE 



When you read about the seven stages, it becomes clear that religions vary wildly on how to 
know God. Each has marked out a separate path whose steps are fixed — often rigidly fixed — 
in dogma. I have steered clear of dogma, knowing full well that Christians do not 
automatically accept an Eastern belief such as karma, just as Hindus and Buddhists do not 
accept a Western belief like Judgment Day. If there is one God, there still cannot be one path. 
Yet no matter which path you walk, two things are necessary. The first is a vision of the goal; 
the second is trust that you have the inner resources to get there. 

To prove that there is a reachable goal, every religious tradition has saints. Saints are 
spiritual achievers. They exhibit deep love and devotion, but saints are more than saintly. You 
and I might show forgiveness toward an enemy because we know that it is the right thing to 
do, or because it raises our sense of inner worth — at the very least we believe God approves 
of forgiveness. When a saint forgives, she can't help herself, her love is an outflowing of her 
nature. And since saints begin life the same as the rest of us, developing a natural sense of 
love, forgiveness, and compassion represents a huge accomplishment. It isn't simply a gift, 
which is why we are justified in saying that saints must be great achievers. They are the 
Einsteins of consciousness. Not only have they reached the spiritual goals set forth by their 
religion, but they prove to the rest of us that the resources exist for getting there ourselves. 

This implies that the saint is laying out a map of the future. Mother Teresa and Saint 
Francis are me, but a me that hasn't yet emerged. The saints of Buddhism, who are called 
bodhisattvas, are sometimes portrayed looking over their shoulders and beckoning with a 
smile, as if to say, "I am going over the threshold. Don't you want to follow?" 

It makes sense to accept their invitation, not just by showing love and compassion, but by 
heeding the principles that uphold the soul's journey. These principles would be found in any 
manual for saints because they hold true from stage one to stage seven. Such a manual doesn't 
exist, but if it did, the following realizations would be right at its core: 

Evolution cannot be stopped; spiritual growth is assured. 

Action is always noticed by God; nothing goes unheeded. 

There is no reliable guide to behavior outside your own heart and mind. 

Reality changes at dfferent stages of growth. 

At some level everyone knows the highest truth. 

Everyone is doing the best they can from their own level of consciousness. 

Suffering is temporary, enlightenment is forever. 

Where do these realizations come from? How do we know they are true? They certainly don't 
come from society or any outward experience. They come from paying attention to the 
countless clues left by spirit. No two people see God in the same way, because no two people 
are at the exact same stage of waking up. Yet in those moments when the five senses give way 
to deeper intuition, each of us gets a glimpse of reality, and as our minds process some 
remarkable event or insight, reality delivers a scrap of truth. 

"Just before college I went to the New York World's Fair," an older friend of mine likes to 
remember. "And they had this ride I will never forget. It was a long tunnel that had a movie 
projected inside it. As you rode along, the images of the movie rushed by at high speed, 
surrounding you with all kinds of futuristic things, but when you got to the end, you realized 
that the conveyor belt had traveled only fifty feet in real distance. I thought this was 
fantastically significant, because my life has been like that. On a daily basis I can walk past 
thousands of people on the street, think myriads of thoughts, go anywhere in my imagination. 
But how much closer have I gotten to my soul? Maybe an inch, maybe less. The outer show is 
very different from the inner journey." 



To judge by the outer show, everyone's life moves rapidly, if chaotically, through scene 
after scene. Yet you might never suspect that there even was an inner journey. Saints prove 
that there is. Having arrived at the goal, they can look back and say that just beneath the 
surface, human life has a pattern, a rising arc. In stage one the possibility of knowing God is 
dim, unlikely, a mere shadow of a possibility. In stage two, as threats and fears subside, the 
possibilities become more interesting and plausible. In stage three they become intriguing, 
something you find it worthwhile to contemplate and perhaps even test out. In stage four 
tentative testing turns more decisive — you actually begin to risk making choices that defy the 
ego's expectations (to use a wonderful phrase I ran across, you begin to live as if God really 
matters). In stage five you have done enough testing; now you want to play. You feel assured 
in your spiritual choices. In stage six you acquire mastery over the spiritual domain, which 
lets you enjoy incredible freedom in the material domain, a freedom never dreamed of earlier. 
In stage seven there are no more choices to be made. The saint merges into the God he 
reveres, and the whole universe operates automatically according to the same principles that 
were once so irrelevant to the struggle of trying to survive. 

If I read in the New Testament that it is right to love your enemy, how does that apply to 
the thief who tried to rob me in my house or the mugger attacking me in the street? I may pay 
lip service to forgiving the criminal, but at a deeper level I will react according to my true 
state of consciousness. I might hate and fear him, or I might want to do everything possible to 
prevent similar crimes from happening — these are typical reactions in stages one and two. I 
might pay more attention to my inner agitation and then realize that the crime was born out of 
the wrongdoer's fear and pain — now we are at stages three and four. As consciousness rises I 
begin to see that my own inner drama projected the whole scenario in which I played the part 
of victim, leading to the realization that the criminal and I are two parts of the same karma — 
insights gained in stages five and six. At this point true forgiveness is available to me. I have 
linked the teaching of Jesus with my own soul. All that remains is stage seven, where the 
criminal is an aspect of myself that I can bless and release to God. 

Every event in your life falls somewhere on this scale of reactions, and the overall pattern 
is a rising arc. The road to sainthood begins in ordinary circumstances with ordinary 
situations. There is no shorter path to God. Because we all have egos, we fantasize that we 
will simply leap to the top of the mountain where the halos are handed out, but this never 
happens. Inner life is too complex, too full of contradictions. An Arctic explorer can tell from 
his map when he has arrived at the pole, but in spiritual exploration the map shifts with every 
step you take. "You need to realize that there is no fixed 'me' who is looking for 
enlightenment," a guru told his disciples. "You have no fixed identity — that is just a fiction 
made up by your ego. In truth there is a different experiencer for every experience." Because 
each of us is a lover one moment and a child the next, a seeker stubbornly clinging to old 
habits, free and yet captive, curious and yet apathetic, secure and frightened at the same time, 
the spiritual journey is never a straight line. Goals have a way of changing; in fact, they must 
change, given that stage one melts into stage two just when you think you have arrived at 
God. In turn stage two will melt away when the time comes. 

Which brings us back to the same question, "Where do I go from here?" Let me take the 
first two principles of a saint and demonstrate how the rising arc applies to you. In each stage 
I will adopt the voice of someone who is trying to come to terms with the principle. 

Evolution cannot be stopped; spiritual growth is assured. 

Stage One (Fight-or-flight response): "This whole idea makes no sense. There are lots of 
evil people who couldn't care less about their souls. My own life is all ups and downs. I take 



two steps backward for every step forward. I have no idea why misfortunes and failure occur; 

I pray to God that they don't and leave it to him." 

Stage Two (Reactive response): "My life keeps getting better as long as I work hard and 
stay up to speed. This makes me optimistic, and I interpret evolution as progress. Since 
childhood I have increased in confidence and skill, so definitely I am progressing — but I'm 
not so sure that applies to the people who haven't caught on to how to succeed. They need 
God more than I do. Inner growth is secondary to success." 

Stage Three (Restful awareness response): "I'm not that pulled into outward events 
anymore, and I think they aren't that real. They are more like symbols of what I hold inside. 
Since childhood my inner world has grown stabler, more comforting and secure. It seems that 
evolution takes place near my heart, and I try to obey my inner impulses, even when they 
don't bring me more money, status, or power. Something deeper is moving forward." 

Stage Four (Intuitive response): "I've stopped believing that my ego knows what's good 
for me. It never made me fulfilled, no matter how often I made choices on behalf of 'I, me, 
mine'. You have to go deeper inside to make your choices, and I've found that at the intuitive 
level, I know what is right — or at least I'm getting there. Too many things have happened that 
can't be explained in the old way. I am part of a mystery, flowing toward an unknown 
destination. That is what fascinates me now." 

Stage Five (Creative response): "Somewhere along the line, I broke free. I am who I 
want to be, doing what I want to do. How did I get to this place? It didn't happen through 
struggle and strife. Somehow a deep current swept me along and brought me here. If that is 
evolution, then I believe in it, although as yet I can't tell you precisely who God is or what my 
soul looks like. It is enough to trust the process." 

Stage Six (Visionary response): "My soul is calling me every hour of every day. I now 
realize that this has always been true, but only now do I notice it so completely, so clearly. It's 
unbearable to turn away from the light, which is the source of my ecstasy. Every time I pray, I 
am aware that God is with me, because if only I had been awake earlier, I would have seen 
that any other possibility is false." 

Stage Seven (Sacred response): "Evolution is all. Every atom in the universe is guided by 
a perfection standing outside time and space. Nothing is amiss. Death itself is part of eternal 
progress, and so is evil. I know, because I am that life force, that endless river. I am its source 
and its destination, its flow and the obstacles that hinder the flow. I carry a few memories of 
my old life, most especially this one: I remember the day that God, the Cosmic Mother, 
embraced me and invited me to join her dance." 

In abbreviated form, we've just accounted for many of the spiritual turning points that shake 
people out of their old beliefs. Truth has many faces, and when you see a new one, your level 
of consciousness rises. We have also illustrated two more of the saints' principles: Everyone is 
doing the best they can from their own level of awareness, and reality keeps changing as your 
consciousness changes. The rising arc of spirit isn’t always so obvious. It gets obscured all the 
time. We don't think about sainthood when corporate downsizing threatens our jobs or when 
the divorce papers are served. But at dramatic moments the soul drops clues into our laps, and 
then we have the choice to pay attention or not. Your soul will always be in communication 
with you, and over time you will heed what it says. 

The spiritual journey is 99 percent repetition, because we are all conditioned to obey ego 
needs, to cling to old habits. We have our ways of doing things, most of them totally 
dependent on the past. Sheer inertia would defeat the soul were it not for its magnetic pull. 
That is why it is useful to cooperate in your own awakening — your enemy is not evil but lack 
of attention. The various practices known as prayer, meditation, contemplation, and yoga have 



been highly valued over the centuries because they sharpen attention and make it easier not to 
miss the clues to spiritual reality. 

A spiritual person is a good listener for silent voices, a sharp observer of invisible objects. 
These traits are more important than trying to act in a way that God would reward with a gold 
star. The second principle of the saints can be dramatized like the first, through the inner 
voice that plays its beliefs over and over in your head until you move on to a new belief, 
bringing with it a new voice. 

Action is always noticed by God; nothing goes unheeded. 

Stage One (Fight-or-flight response): "Maybe God sees the fall of a sparrow, but you 
couldn't tell it by me. If I didn't do my part to fit in, I would be alone and forgotten. The 
cherished feelings I have for my family are what holds my life together, because these few 
people care that I exist. Events are random, treacherous things that can happen at any 
moment. I never forget that. After I die, I will just be a memory, or if I am lucky I will then 
find out if God knows who I am. My faith tells me that he does." 

Stage Two (Reactive response): "Everything comes with a price. If you waste your time 
and energy, life doesn't give you much back. But since I know how to organize my life, I can 
bring life's rewards my way. Everything I do has a point; my driving ambition is to make each 
moment count. When the time comes to rest, I will look around with satisfaction at what I've 
made of myself. I don't have time to think about what comes next, but in scary moments I 
wonder if God will get me for the bad things I had to do." 

Stage Three (Restful awareness response): "I wonder if things are as random as they 
appear. I've seen evil rewarded and good punished. Yet at other times an underlying purpose 
seems to raise its head. I need to think about all this because the answers I get from society 
are too confused and conflicted. It just may be true that someone up there knows everything; I 
feel it in my bones." 

Stage Four (Intuitive response): "I could swear that someone is reading my mind. If I 
think of something, it seems to happen, or at least there are a lot of unexplained coincidences. 
I've learned to go with these signals, wherever they come from. I am the master of my own 
choices. Sometimes I make mistakes, but even those I can witness with calm acceptance." 

Stage Five (Creative response): "Things work out because they are meant to. Otherwise 
the world would be a churning cauldron, and it isn't. Everywhere I look I see patterns and 
symbols; there is incredible beauty and order. There are times when this complexity 
intoxicates me. I just can't believe so much potential exists — I have the heart of an artist but 
the soul of a wizard. Who knows what kind of power I will one day wield." 

Stage Six (Visionary response): "The world has a heart, and that heart is love. In the 
midst of all struggle, I see that God is watching. He doesn't interfere, but he doesn't lose track, 
either. He brings a solution to fit every problem, a reaction that suits every action. How he 
does this is a mystery, but nothing is more real. There is grace in the fall of a leaf. Our deeds 
are weighed in the balance by a loving Creator who never judges or punishes." 

Stage Seven (Sacred response): "Action and reaction are one, and always have been. As 
events spin from the web of time, I see no difference between the action and the one who 
performs it. The ego used to believe that there was an 'I' who had to oversee and control. This 
'I' is only an illusion. No action could ever be lost or overlooked in the fabric of unity." 

* * * 

These viewpoints look very different on the surface, yet the same principle is being unfolded 
in a rising arc. In other words, a secret spiritual path underlies the apparent randomness of 



everyday existence. "All of reality is a symbol for spirit," the Sufis say. Or, to recall Rumi's 
beautiful phrase, "I come from Elsewhere, and though I do not know where that is, I am 
certain to return there in the end." Only in stage six does the saint realize that his soul's 
unfolding was always taking place. Until clarity dawns, a certain amount of confusion is 
always present. 

Everyone receives the same signals from God. The impulse to behave in the highest 
spiritual way comes to us from beyond our five senses. We refuse to believe that we are 
connected. But in truth when love is called for, each person tries to display perfect love; when 
compassion is called for, each person tries to display perfect compassion. This holds for the 
criminal, the saint, the businessman, the dictator, the factory worker. The message is pure; the 
filter is impure. 

The saint sees that we are all hooked into the same level of infinite intelligence, creativity, 
and love. God and your soul are in perfect communication. The message breaks down for 
reasons we have been detailing at length: ego needs, distortions of perception, lack of self- 
worth, and all kinds of traumas and wounds that defeat our best intentions. If lumped together, 
these impurities are called avidya in the Indian tradition, a Sanskrit word that breaks down 
into two components, the root word for "not" and the root word for "knowing." By not 
knowing who we are, by not knowing what God is, by not knowing how to connect with the 
soul, we fall into sin and ignorance. In everyday usage, avidya is sometimes called both sin 
and ignorance, but these pejorative terms hide the essence of the truth, which is that all such 
obstacles exist in consciousness and can be cleared away. 

What's the one thing you can do today to grow in spirit? Stop defining yourself. Don't 
accept any thought that begins "I am this or that." You are not this or that. You are beyond 
definition, and therefore any attempt to say "I am X" is wrong. You are in passage. You are in 
the process of redefining yourself every day. Aid that process, and you cannot help but leap 
forward on the path. 

If you take a clear look at yourself, you will find that your mind is more like a swarm of 
bees than like an arrow shooting straight for the goal. A swarm of bees can travel from point 
A to point B, just like an arrow, but it does so in a vague, swirling, fuzzy way. Thus we hold 
in our minds all kinds of shifting attitudes, many of which contradict each other. Our love is 
bound up with hatred, our trust with suspicion, our altruism with selfishness. Because this is 
so, the only clear path to God is a path of constant self-awareness. You must see through your 
own mask if you want to take it off. 

Avidya is hard to pierce. It takes a lot of attention to look in the mirror, because our masks 
do not stop looking back at us. But if you take any issue facing you, your present attitudes 
will be a clue to your deeper beliefs, and belief is where the real change must occur. A belief 
lies close to the soul. It is like a microchip that keeps sending out the same signal over and 
over, making the same interpretation of reality until you are ready to pull out the old chip and 
install a new one. The following pages explore this in greater detail. 


MASKING THE SOUL 



Our attitudes hide deeper spiritual beliefs, and when we see through them, beliefs can 
be changed. 

Mask: atheist, cynic, or failed seeker 

Attitude: Doubt, resistance, ironical detachment, in the habit of mistrust. Fail-back 
emotion (f} is anxiety. 

Belief: God cannot be proved; if he exists he has no power over the material world; I 
am alone, my fear of emptiness is my chief reason to keep seeking. 

Mask: leader, achiever, or skeptic 

Attitude: Certainty, confidence, self-reliance, in the habit of demanding rational 
explanations. Fall-back emotion is anger or obstinacy. 

Belief: I am in control of my life, not God; if he demands surrender I will ignore him; 
secretly I believe that my own power is greater than his. 

Mask: thinker or dreamer 

Attitude: Reflective, conciliatory, calm, in the habit of assessing situations 
emotionally. Fail-back emotion is depression or resignation. 

Belief: God hints at his presence inside me; I will get the message once I stop falling 
into confusion; God favors inward-looking action more than outward action. 

Mask: idealist or liberator 

Attitude: Self-aware, nonjudgmental, willing to be an iconoclast or to defy normal 
expectations. Fail-back emotion is detachment. 

Belief: God doesn't think I am wrong or sinful; I can only accept him to the degree I 
accept myself; forgiveness is real. 

Mask: artist, adventurer, or explorer 

Attitude: Playful, emotionally resilient, eager to try anything new, tendency to be 
highly sensitive. Fall-back emotion is fantasy (self-absorption). 

Belief: God has made a recreational universe; I am safe following my creative 
impulses; I am approved of by God. 

Mask: prophet or redeemer 

Attitude: Humble, deeply forgiving and accepting of others, awed by mystery, able to 
see to the depth of any person or situation. Fail-back emotion is love. 

Belief: There are no miracles until you see that all of life is a miracle; God works 
through me, my greatest joy is service to him. 

Mask: no mask 

Attitude: Immersion in bliss, wisdom, and peace, with no personal attitudes — the 
viewpoint is universal. Fall-back emotion is compassion. 

Belief: No personal beliefs; every action and word comes directly from the divine 
source; a certainty that being human is a blessed state. 

The above serves to show how pervasively we are influenced by our state of awareness. Every 
emotion or attitude has a spiritual meaning, despite the fact that society doesn't acknowledge 
this. In society's eyes, events become spiritual only in church or during times of crisis and 
transition. But the soul journey is a constant in everyone's life. Your typical attitudes, along 
with the emotions you cannot shake, indicate in a subtle way that spiritual issues are churning 


at a deeper level. Even the saint and the redeemer are wearing a mask, however thin, that 
doesn't yet let them see the totality of the self. A set of attitudes may fit you so well that you 
apply them almost all the time. This is the mark of someone who moves very slowly on the 
path, such as the confirmed skeptic who remains doubtful about all spiritual issues, from the 
existence of God to the possibility of an afterlife. People who cling firmly to skepticism are 
likely to deny that they have any fear of emptiness and abandonment, yet ultimately they have 
more of these issues than anyone else — the mask is just highly deceptive. 

In the same vein, highly successful people who owe their achievements to struggle and 
competitiveness tend to wear the mask of self-confidence and not to look at the hidden beliefs 
that would put them in defiance of God. Even if they "believe in" God, they act on personal 
power, and if seriously confronted with the possibility of surrender, they reject it outright. 
Between will and surrender, there is no choice for them. 

What is the mark of someone who moves very quickly on the path? ft may seem to be a 
paradox, but the more turbulent you are inside, the faster you are moving. Ferment is good. 
Not buying into your own story is good. Krishnamurti used to say that discontent was the 
flame of the seeker. Meher Baba, an Indian master aligned with Sufism, taught that the only 
prerequisite for waking up was total disillusionment. Why? Because the whole notion that you 
are a fixed entity is a great illusion, and the sooner you see how varied and complex you are, 
the sooner you will drop the masks of your ego. 

There is no standing still in nature; creatures either move forward or die. Seeing how a 
flower blooms, goes to seed, and sacrifices itself to bring new life, we wonder if our souls fall 
into the same cycle. Do we rise and fall, going through an endless round of birth and death? 

Or is there a tendency to keep moving closer to God, despite the many obstacles and setbacks 
that befall us along the way? Speaking personally, this is an important question for my 
behavior today, since 1 can choose to obey my ego drives or my higher ideals. Ninety-nine 
percent of humanity has a story they believe in, and nothing shakes them from their story. 
Saints remind us to choose the ideal over the egotistical, and when being selfish, greedy, and 
ambitious is just too tempting, the saints don't condemn us. "Come to me," Rumi implores, 
"even if you have broken your vows a thousand times." The soul can't be hindered by outward 
action. No one makes the soul journey faster or slower than anyone else. Time doesn’t count 
at the level of the soul. What counts is perception. When you perceive that awakening is 
inevitable, the magnetic pull of the soul will keep changing you. 

You and I are nothing but saints in the making. We can exhibit whatever behavior we 
want, but life flows upward from the roots, not downward from the branches. On a spiritual 
basis, being good is never wrong. But in terms of sheer effectiveness — which means trying to 
wake up with the fewest delays, obstacles, and backsliding — adopting the right belief is much 
more powerful. As the first principle says, evolution cannot be stopped. With this belief in 
mind, you have a basis for forgiving any wrongdoing, letting go of the past, and giving 
yourself a second chance at anything where you failed the first time around. There is no fall 
from grace, only a very long furlough. In the end there is only one reliable guide: Find your 
place on the rising arc and keep moving. 

* A fall-back emotion is a coping response. It arises when you cannot resolve inner tension or a crisis. It also 
reflects a sense of connection or separation from God. 


SPIRITUAL AWAKENING 


If asked what separates a spiritual person from a skeptic, I would not say that the answer is 
belief in God. It is clarity. Millions of believers still strive to be "saved," whether they are 



Christians, Muslims, or of any other faith. They actively seek a clear perception of God that 
will affect them personally. When does this become possible? Do we have to wait for stage 
six, the stage of the saint, or any particular stage at all? Stripped of religious coloration, being 
saved is the same as awakening in consciousness, a perceptual leap that makes God real 
instead of doubtful. Here is a striking example. 

A young man in his twenties named Bede Griffiths had been going through a period of 
deep doubt and depression. Being religious, he sought solace in a church, where he prayed 
without success. One day during service he heard the line "Open my eyes that I may see the 
wondrous things of Thy law" from the 113th Psalm. Deeply moved, the young man felt his 
melancholy lift away, and he had the overwhelming sense that his prayers had been answered 
by divine intervention. He walked outside onto the London streets, and later described the 
experience in the following words: 

When I went outside, I found that the world about me no longer oppressed me as it had 
done. The hard casing of exterior reality seemed to have been broken through, and 
everything disclosed its inner being. The buses in the streets seemed to have lost their 
solidity and were glowing with light. I hardly felt the ground as I trod ... I was like a 
bird that has broken the shell of its egg and finds itself in a new world; like a child that 
has forced its way out of the womb and sees the light of day for the first time. (If 

Time and again in such awakenings there is an insistence that outer things have 
dramatically changed, whereas to other observers they haven't. But this doesn't mean that 
going into the light, seeing the face of God, or whatever other name we wish to give to the 
experience is false. The observer isn't separate from outer reality. The photons firing in the 
brain are exactly the same as photons organized into "real" objects. So inner and outer vision 
are not separate. The mystical branch of Islam known as Sufism declares that all light, inner 
and outer, is but one light. This is something people find hard to accept, because the duality of 
inner versus outer, real versus unreal, objective versus subjective has been drilled into us 
since birth. To get past this dualism, we have to return to our three levels of existence: 

When light is visible and organized into concrete objects, reality is material. 

When light contains feeling, thought, and intelligence, reality is quantum. 

When light is completely unmanifest, with no qualities anyone can measure, reality 
is virtual. 

In place of the old dualism that insists upon keeping our inner and outer life apart, we can 
restore the light to its wholeness. One can think of a photon as the archetype of all energy that 
is blossoming out from nothing and nowhere to something and somewhere: the bridge for 
mystical awakenings is light as it moves from virtual to material existence. 

In this scheme one traditional belief gets reversed. The virtual domain, unlike heaven, is 
our source rather than our destination after death. When physicists declare that the cosmos 
once had ten or more dimensions, all but four of which collapsed back where they came from, 
the virtual state is where they went. 

This is so difficult to conceptualize that a simple analogy might help: let's say that you are 
thinking in words and then shift to humming a tune in your head. This shift to music brings in 
completely different laws of nature than the laws that govern words. Yet you can move from 
one dimension to the other quite easily. The musical dimension is always there, even though 
you may not be contacting it. In the same way, other dimensions exist outside the cosmos, but 
we do not access their laws, and if we tried, we would have to give up our own. This is why 


your body and mind could not survive passage through a black hole or travel beyond the 
speed of light. 

In order for a packet of energy to appear, to be seen by the eyes as photons, it doesn’t 
suddenly jump into material existence. Between the void and visible light, between darkness 
and things you can see and touch, there is the quantum layer. This level is accessible to our 
brains, which are quantum machines that create thought by manipulating energy into intricate 
patterns. At this level light dawns as awareness of something, rather than simply being 
awareness in its pure state. This is the place where Einstein looked for God's mind — he was 
searching for religious insight without the unscientific subjectivity that would have doomed 
his theories to rejection by his peers. (It is fascinating to follow the mystical journeys of great 
physicists like Einstein, Schrodinger, and Pauli, because as they arrived, awestruck before the 
mystery of creation, they had to cover their trails, so to speak, to avoid any accusation that 
they were mere mystics and not scientists. In the case of Einstein and Pauli, the taint of being 
too receptive to religious concepts finally did cast a shadow over their later work.) 

To an experimental physicist, a photon is a quantum of light. This might only be of 
technical interest were it not for the fact that quantum physics holds the key to even greater 
secrets. We know nothing directly about energy in its virtual state — this is essentially 
inaccessible to any measuring instrument. But one way to understand the virtual domain is as 
the space between subatomic particles, called the virtual field. A subatomic particle isn't a 
thing hanging out in space like a baseball drifting over home plate, but a disturbance in the 
field. The disturbance takes place as a quantum event, sometimes pictured as a wave. There is 
a spiritual parallel to this in the Vedas, where the sages declare that the undisturbed state of 
consciousness is bliss, the disturbed state is the world. 

Throughout the universe, the photon is the most basic unit of electromagnetic energy. 
Every single thing you can perceive is actually a swirling cloud of energy. At the moment of 
the Big Bang the universe exploded with energy that now forms everything in existence, and 
buried somewhere under the skin of every object or event, the primordial light still burns. 
Being the essence of transformation, primordial light isn't always the same shape or form 
billions of years later. A granite cliff is solid, hard, flintlike light; an impulse of love is sweet, 
emotional light; the firing of a neuron is an instant flash of invisible light. Yet as dissimilar as 
they appear, when broken down to their most basic components, all things derive from the 
same primal stuff. 

Without the quantum level of reality there could be no cosmos, and it is here that order and 
symmetry, the keys to life, first appeared. But few eminent physicists besides Einstein have 
ventured to explore the possibility that the quantum level is a transition to God. So it is 
necessary to consider other thinkers. In the last century in India there was a revered saint, Sri 
Ramakrishna, who held the post of priest in a large, wealthy temple outside Calcutta. It was 
his duty to place offerings every day before the statue of Kali, one of the guises of the divine 
mother, the Goddess. 

Having done this day after day, Ramakrishna became very devoted to the divine mother. 
Then one day a change occurred: "It was suddenly revealed to me," he says, "that not just the 
statue but everything in the room was made of pure spirit. The bowl, the utensils, the floor 
and ceiling were all manifestations of the same thing. When I realized this, I began to act like 
someone insane. I began throwing flowers everywhere and worshiping everything. Worship, 
worship, worship in all directions." 

This is what I would call an overlap of levels. Ramakrishna didn't go into a trance or leave 
his senses behind — the material level of the world was still visible, but something finer 
suddenly penetrated and permeated it. This permeation came from the virtual level, which 
can't be registered by the five senses. There is nothing to see, hear, touch, taste, or smell. 
However, our brains are designed to assign a time and place to everything; therefore the 



invisible levels get merged into the visible, as if the flower or the statue or the holy water has 
become infused with spirit before our eyes. 

An awakening can be very confusing if the brain suddenly has to make sense of impulses 
not of this world. New feelings arise. Perhaps the most uncanny feeling is that of pure 
awareness: one is awake, alive, but without thoughts, and free from the limitations of the 
body. The closest most of us come to this feeling is the first minute when we wake up in the 
morning or the last before we fall asleep. There is awareness here, but no content, no rush of 
thoughts in the brain, and if you pay close enough attention, even the sense of identity is 
blanked out — you feel yourself being present, yet you aren't aware of any specifics such as 
your name, address, occupation, age, daily concerns, or relationships. At the instant you wake 
up, just before all the particulars of your situation flood back once more, you could be a child 
again and your familiar home could be anyplace in the world. 

One would assume that this is just a passing feeling. Yet the experience of pure awareness 
lies at the heart of religious awakening. The only region of nature that enjoys total freedom is 
heaven, as religious people might call it. In physics the equivalent would be the virtual level 
of reality. Not that this is a blessed place where souls enjoy the company of angels — such a 
concept is totally foreign to physical science, but the resemblance is based on a shift in the 
rules or laws of nature. 

Heaven is imagined as a place free from the bonds of earthly life where gravity no longer 
holds down the body. In heaven there are no cares or attachments. Eternal joy is the soul's 
constant state. Without having to imagine them, all these qualities can be traced back to the 
experience of waking up. The great difference between this experience and heaven is that the 
virtual domain isn't outside us; one doesn't "go" there either in body or soul. One may look 
forward to dying and achieving heaven as a reward, but it is more in tune with virtual reality 
to find it now. How? A famous anecdote in India tells of the ascetic who goes to the 
mountaintop to become enlightened. He fasts and prays constantly; he gives up all worldly 
desires in favor of meditation. 

His renunciation goes on for many years until the day when he realizes he has finally 
arrived. No matter where he looks, he senses only the unbounded bliss of pure awareness, 
without attachment of any kind. Overjoyed, he rushes down into the village below to tell 
everyone, and as he is going along, he runs into a crowd of drunken revelers. Quietly he tries 
to thread his way through, but one drunk after another bumps him and makes a crude remark. 
Finally the ascetic can't stand it and cries, "Get out of my way!" At that instant he stops, turns 
around, and goes back to the mountain. 

This anecdote is about how easily we are fooled into thinking that we can escape our own 
anger and frailty, but the larger point is that using the personality to get to the absolute is a 
contradiction. 

Certain parts of ourselves are designed to live in this world of time. It takes resolve and 
purpose to succeed in loosening our bonds enough so that pure awareness feels totally 
comfortable, and in the face of conflicts we instinctively fall back on anger, as we fall back on 
stubbornness, self-centeredness, righteous certainty, and so forth. Yet at another level we do 
not even possess these qualities, much less feel tied to them. Religious seeking, whatever 
form it takes, tries to regain that unattached level. 

Seen in this context, some of the most mysterious writings of saints and sages become very 
clear. Consider this Chinese poem from Li Po, written in the eighth century: 

You ask why I seclude myself here in my little forest hut? 

I just smile and say nothing, listening to the quiet in my soul. 

This peacefulness lives in another world 

That no one owns. 



What we can now see in these words is a change of perspective that is always here, right 
with us, as a possibility. With the loss of time comes a complete absence of ordinary identity. 
The personality that I feel myself to be dissolves beyond the material level, and with that, I 
lose the need for the landmarks that I have gathered since birth. 

Awakening is at the root of the world's religions. It unites prophets, messiahs, and saints 
into a privileged elite. That awakening can be recounted through wondrous stories such as that 
of the young prince Siddhartha, before he became the Buddha, being transported from his 
palace on a flying white horse supported by angels at each hoof. Such legends convey the 
tremendous effect of waking up to a new level of reality. That this reality arose in the mind 
sounds too abstract and prosaic. There needs to be a more dramatic event, such as a heaven 
that suddenly opens up, or divine messengers who descend from on high. 

Most people outside the faith of Islam are unaware of the moment when the prophet 
Muhammad was awakened. (2) It took place at night in a cave outside the city of Mecca. 
Muhammad was forty, a merchant of no memorable distinction; in fact almost nothing is 
known of his life beforehand. On this night, however, the angel Gabriel appeared in a blaze of 
light and said, "Recite!" 

Amazed and baffled, Muhammad could only ask, "Recite what?" To which the angel 
replied, "Recite in the name of the Lord the creator" and then delivered the gift of prophecy 
that enabled Muhammad to know the word of God. This event occurred in the year 610 and is 
revered in Islam as the Night of Qadr (which means glory or power). But the actual text of the 
Koran was not assembled until more than thirty years later, after the Prophet's death. Since 
Muhammad could neither read nor write, his account of events is not recorded. All the suras, 
or chapters, of the Koran, which vary widely in length from three lines to thirty pages, were 
gathered by a committee that interviewed those remaining devotees who had heard 
Muhammad speak, as well as from scraps of written text from the same sources. 

It is a specific tradition that insists that the angel Gabriel arrived as a physical presence, 
just as tradition insists that Jesus confronted Satan in the wilderness or that the future Buddha 
flew from his palace. (Muhammad would also be accorded a flight on a magical horse, when 
he was granted a tour of all the levels of heaven. Although one can visit the Dome of the Rock 
in Jerusalem and view the place where the journey began, including the hoofprint left in stone 
by the horse's heavenward leap, this legend was bom from a single line in the Koran that 
speaks of the Prophet going from his home in Mecca to a far temple.) 

These legends are now articles of faith, and for anyone to speculate that Muhammad might 
not have seen an angel or that Satan did not literally offer Jesus kingship over the earth would 
be risking blasphemy. However, it isn't necessary to believe or disbelieve the literal version of 
the Night of Qadr or the forty days in the wilderness. The essential point is that our minds can 
open to the sudden inrush of light. 


THE MIND FIELD 


"Light" as used in scriptures always stands for awareness, whether or not physical light is 
actually seen. Christians regard Jesus as "the light of the world" because of his state of higher 
consciousness, and the word "light" is a synonym for a whole range of things, from 
inspiration and holiness to embodied spirit and God's essence. Versions of the same imagery 
are applied by followers of Buddha and Muhammad, of course, even though each religion 
makes claims of uniqueness for its founder. The disputes among religions are almost always 


over exclusive claims that only their founder entered the light, or that his place before God is 
highest. Awareness, though, is a common heritage, even a cosmic heritage if we accept the 
existence of mind at the quantum and virtual level. When asked what the experience of God 
feels like, people's responses, different as they may be, all converge on a shift into higher 
awareness. 

I am proposing that no one is alive who hasn't taken just such a journey. The "way," 
whether it is used in the Christian sense of a path or the Taoist sense of the hidden stream of 
life, means following the light. None of us could even be here without having roots where 
light is born, in the quantum domain. To understand this fully, however, we have to modify 
our picture of the world from a reality sandwich with three layers into something more 
dynamic — a flow chart. 


Material 

QUANTUM 

Virtual 

Reality is constantly flowing from the virtual level to the quantum to the material. In 
mystical terms, this constant movement is called "the river of life," because to the mystic 
everything begins in the mind of God before it appears on the surface as an event or object. 
But the river is more than a metaphor. With every thought, memory, and desire we take a 
journey upriver, from our invisible source to our material destination. 

One day I was sitting quietly, preparing for meditation, when I happened to see an old, 
faintly familiar face in my mind's eye. After a moment I realized who it was, a patient from 
twenty years ago. He was a diabetic, and every week I would call him at home to adjust his 
insulin levels. 

As I closed my eyes, I had the faint thought, "I wonder what his name was?" No more than 
that, just a faint thought. I meditated for an hour, and as I opened my eyes again, a name 
suddenly came to mind, along with a telephone number. It seemed so improbable that I had 
recalled them that I went directly to the phone and dialed. The voice at the other end was in 
fact my old patient Raoul. 

Raoul's telephone number hadn't changed in all that time, yet my brain had certainly been 
changing. Therein lies a mystery. Brain cells are not constant. We are bom with about half the 
complement of neurons found in an adult brain; the rest develop between six months and two 
years of age. Each neuron is connected to every other through billions of threads that branch 
out into thousands of tendrils per cell, forming a vast network. These tendrils, known as 
dendrites, sprout at the end of the cell like a tree trunk sprouting branches (the word dendrite 
comes from the Greek word for tree). 

Although it sounds fixed and stable, this network is constantly shifting. And even if a 
neuron could remain the same, growing no new branches, the signals streaming down the 
dendrites are never the same from moment to moment. Electrical impulses surge everywhere, 
shifting as we think new thoughts; our brains are like a telephone system with a thousand calls 
taking place every second. The main difference is that the cable lines of our nervous system 
are unstable, constantly changing their molecules with every moment of experience — both 
inner and outer. The wires are notoriously nonstationary, since they are made not of copper 
but of fluid fats, water, electrolytes, and the electrical charges running through them. Having a 
single thought is more complex than sorting out one message from all the telephone calls in 
the world. While we are managing that feat electrically, the brain also surges with chemical 
messages. One dendrite isn't strung into another; there is always a tiny gap between them. 
Across this gap, known as a synapse, each message must find a way to cross; otherwise the 
neurons would be isolated and unable to communicate. Electricity doesn't jump across the 



gap — the voltages are much too tiny to accomplish this. Instead, certain chemicals are emitted 
on one side of the synapse and received on the other. These chemicals, called 
neuro transmitters, include dopamine and serotonin. 

Amid these chaotic swirls of chemicals and electrons, no one has ever found a memory. 
Memories are fixed. For me to recall Raoul's face, I have to retrieve it intact, not in bits and 
pieces. Where do I go to do that? Certainly not into the firestorm of the brain. No single 
neuron in my brain has survived intact for twenty years. Like migrating birds, molecules of 
fat, protein, and sugar have drifted through my neurons, adding to them and leaving again 
after a time. 

Even though we can identify the memory centers of the brain, no one has ever proved that 
memory is stored there. We assume it is, but how? To store a memory in a neuron is like 
storing a memory in water. (In fact, the brain is so fluid that if homogenized it would have the 
same water content as a bowl of oatmeal. Your blood is actually more filled with solid content 
than your cerebrum.) The notion that we store memory the way a computer stores it, by 
imprinting microchips with bits of information, is not supported by the evidence; when 
neurologists try to prove it, they soon hit a wall. 

It is the same wall that Einstein and the other founders of quantum physics broke through. 
A neuron is a poor receptacle for memory because, at bottom, its molecules are not solid; they 
are patterns of invisible energy grouped into the appearance of particles. These energy packets 
themselves survive only on the quantum level; go deeper still, into the virtual level, and the 
patterns dissolve; the energy vanishes into ghostly vibrations and then into nothing. Can 
memory be stored in nothing? 

The answer is yes. When I remembered my old patient's face, I took a journey into 
nothing, searching for him nowhere. I used my brain to make this journey, or at least to begin 
it. But it wasn't my brain that recalled his telephone number, any more than my radio contains 
the music I hear in my car. 

I mentioned already that the virtual domain has no time, space, or energy. This turns out to 
be immensely important when it comes to memory. No one doubts that the brain uses energy. 
It burns food as calories, subsisting on glucose, a simple sugar that gets broken down to 
accommodate the brain's complex activities. But as atoms of food are mined for their energy 
and this energy gets converted into thought, none of it is channeled into memory. It doesn't 
take food to store the image of where you were ten years ago on your birthday or what you 
did yesterday after work. 

Nor does it seem to take energy to remember these things. Going back to my example, I 
didn’t consciously try to retrieve anything from my memories. I was meditating, and after an 
hour a name and a telephone number came to me. Was my brain working on the problem all 
that time? Currently no one has an answer. Our popular belief is that the brain functions like a 
Macintosh built from organic matter (one researcher has called it "a computer made of meat," 
a disturbing but unforgettable phrase). It is my belief that the brain is the last stop downriver, 
the end point of impulses that begin on the virtual level, flow through the quantum level, and 
wind up as flashes of electricity along the tru nk s and branches of our neurons. 

When you remember anything, you move from world to world, maintaining the illusion 
that you are still here among familiar sights and sounds. Sometimes the connections are 
faulty — I might have come up with the wrong name or telephone number. Without 
understanding this journey, however, there is not much hope of undertaking the spiritual 
journey back to God, because both routes are the same. 

The advent of CT scans and MRIs has afforded us a glimpse into the brain as a place 
where energy is constantly being generated. But the brain and the mind are different. 
Sometimes brain surgery has to be performed with the patient awake, conscious, and able to 
answer questions. If you are talking to such a patient and ask him to lift his arm, he obeys like 



anyone else, even though a section of his skull has been removed, exposing the cerebral 
cortex to open air. Now take an electrode and stimulate part of the motor cortex so that the 
same arm suddenly moves. The action is exactly the same as when you asked the patient to 
perform this action. However, there is one huge difference. In the first instance if you ask 
what has happened, the patient will respond, "I moved my arm." In the second instance if you 
ask what happened, the patient will respond, "My arm moved." 

Despite the external similarity (the arm moved), the first act involved will and desire; a 
mysterious entity called "I" did the work, not simply the brain. Such an experiment was 
actually performed by the pioneering Canadian brain surgeon Wilder Penfield, which led him 
to conclude that our minds and our brains are not at all the same. (3) Today we can expand on 
the ways in which the two seem to diverge: 

1 . You ask me my name, and I give it to you with a flash of activity in my cerebral 
cortex. But it takes no brain activity for me to know my name. 

2. At the store I choose whether to buy vanilla or chocolate ice cream. As I think about 
the choice, my brain is working, but the chooser — the person who decides between A 
or B — is nowhere to be found in the brain. 

3. You and I are looking at a Picasso painting. I say I like it, you say you don't. It takes 
brain activity for us to express our opinions, but the difference in taste isn't an activity. 

4. I am sitting on an airplane worrying about what to say in my lecture when we land. I 
fall asleep and begin to doze. When I wake up, I know exactly what I want to talk 
about. This shift from worry to certainty was not a measurable brain event, since in 
sleep I did no conscious thinking. 

5. You are sitting on the sofa reading when all at once the name of an old friend pops 
into your mind. The next instant, you hear the phone ring and it is your friend calling. 
It took brain activity to recall the name, but no brain mechanism could time the 
coincidence. 

6. You meet a stranger at a party and in a moment of instant attraction you know that this 
is the person you will marry. In time you do, and it is revealed that he had exactly the 
same feeling for you. The brain may account for all the hormonal attractions, even the 
mental and emotional impulses that make each of you "right" for the other. It cannot 
possibly account for your simultaneous certainty, however. 

When Penfield began his work in the 1930s, science had not yet firmly decided that the 
mind was just a ghost created by neurons. By the 1970s it was obvious to him that many 
experts "would, no doubt, silence me before I began to discuss the mind and the brain, if they 
could. They declare that since the mind, by its very nature, cannot have a position in space, 
there is only one phenomenon to be considered, namely, the brain." Nonetheless, Penfield 
(along with Sir John Eccles, an equally audacious brain researcher in Britain) asked an 
obvious question. Where in the brain can you find any mechanism that possesses intuition, 
creativity, insight, imagination, understanding, intent, knowing, will, decision, or spirit? 
Indeed all the higher functions of the brain still cannot create the qualities that make us most 
human. Are we supposed to dismiss them as illusion or postpone discussion until someone 
discovers genes for the soul? 

Among his many observations, Penfield noted that the brain retains memory even while 
dormant. Patients recover from severe states of coma still knowing such things as language, as 
well as their own life history. Under deep anesthesia, about 1 percent of surgical patients 
report that they could hear what the surgeons were saying around them and can even recall 
details of what transpired during the procedure. Therefore, even though he didn’t know how it 
worked, Penfield speculated that the mind must have its own energy source. Somehow it also 


gets energy from the brain — when the brain dies or loses function, as in a stroke, certain or all 
mental operations are cut off. But energy inside the brain isn't enough to explain how the 
mind survives traumas. 

A brain totally deprived of oxygen for up to four minutes (longer if the body is very cold) 
can still recover complete mental functioning. During that interval of deprivation, the 
machinery of the brain shuts down. Under deep anesthesia, there are practically no higher 
brain waves at all, making it impossible for the cerebral cortex to accomplish anything so 
complex as remembering what a surgeon is saying. The fact that the mind can survive brain 
trauma and function under anesthesia points very strongly to the separate existence of the 
mind. In simplest terms, Penfield came to the conclusion that "it is the mind which 
experiences and it is the brain which records the experience." He concluded that the mind 
must be a kind of invisible energy field that includes the brain, perhaps even controls it. In 
place of energy field, I believe we should say "information field," because the brain clearly 
processes information that is flowing and related to all that exists. 

As soon as one uses the term field, a step has been taken into the realm of quantum reality. 
The brain is a thing with material structures like a cortex and a limbic system. A field is not a 
thing. The magnetic field of the earth exerts a pull over every iron particle, causing it to move 
this way or that, yet nothing visible or tangible is doing the moving. In the same way the mind 
causes the brain to move this way or that. Think of the word aardvark. Then think of the word 
Rangoon. The first word contains its own sound and meaning, paralleled in the brain by a 
specific pattern of waves. The second word is also defined by its unique patterns. Therefore, 
to go from one word to the other requires a radical shift involving millions of neurons. Who 
makes this shift? The first pattern has to be totally dissolved in order to bring up the second; 
there is no transition between them that serves as a link. Aardvark is wiped out (including 
your mental picture of a giant anteatera so that Rangoon can take its place (including your 
image of its place on the map and whatever you know of Burmese history). In between is only 
an empty gap, like the black space between two images in a movie. 

Yet somehow this gap, which has no brain activity at all, manages to organize millions of 
neurons. It knows the difference between an aardvark and Rangoon without your having to 
think about the difference — in fact, you don't have to will yourself to organize even one brain 
cell into the incredibly intricate pattern necessary to produce a word. It all happens 
automatically, without expenditure of energy — brain energy, that is. Another kind of energy 
may exist in the gap. Eccles made the famous statement that "God is in the gap." What he 
meant was that the empty spaces of the brain, the tiny synapses between two nerve endings, 
must be the home of higher mind because it could not be found in the material stuff of the 
brain. 

Our minds are a vital tool in the search for God. We trust the mind and listen to it; we 
follow its impulses; we rely on its accuracy. Far more than this, however, the mind interprets 
the world for us, gives it meaning. To a depressed person the sight of a glowing Tahitian 
sunset mirrors his sadness, while to someone else the same signals to the retina may invoke 
wonder and joy. As Penfield would say, the brain is recording the sunset, but only the mind 
can experience it. As we search for God, we want our interpretations to rise even higher than 
our minds can take us, so that we might understand birth and death, good and evil, heaven and 
hell. When this understanding extends to spirit, two invisible fields, mind and soul, need to be 
connected if we are to have any confidence in them. 

God requires the most delicate response of the mind. If the mind is troubled or unrefined, 
the journey back to God cannot be successfully made. Many factors come into play here, but 
in terms of the mind/brain connection, Valerie Hunt, a researcher with degrees in both 
psychology and physiology, has made some important connections, recounted in her 1989 
book, Infinite Mind. (4) After hooking subjects up to EEGs, she determined that certain brain 


wave patterns can be associated with higher spiritual experiences. This finding extends earlier 
research, now three decades old, which established that going into deep meditation alters the 
patterns of alpha waves in the brain, along with heartbeat, respiration, and blood pressure. 

But Dr. Hunt was further interested in why people do not have spiritual experiences. In 
doing so, she took the step of supposing that we should all be naturally connected to the 
totality of the mind's field of energy and information, just as we are all connected to the parts 
that involve thinking. It is a simple but profound assumption. Why do we block spirit out? 

"The problem is always fear of the intense emotions that occur at the mystical level," Hunt 
asserts, "experiences so real and profound that we cannot easily comprehend or accept them.... 
Another way to describe our blocks is to say that we don't want to change our priorities, nor 
our beliefs about ourselves and God." The mind field, it seems, is a mine field. (5) 

This spiritual "stuckness" is not just a limitation of the brain. Researchers before Hunt 
have documented that if the right temporal lobe is deprived of oxygen for a few moments, its 
activity begins to heighten, thus creating the illusion of "going into the light." The same 
floating feeling, the sensation of being outside the body, feelings of ecstasy and 
otherworldliness, even visions of departed souls and angels beckoning one into the light — all 
these phenomena can be imitated through oxygen deprivation, or by whirling subjects in a 
large centrifuge of the kind used to train astronauts for the experience of intense gravitational 
forces. Yet inducing the experience isn't the same as having it; there is no spiritual meaning to 
centrifugal force or oxygen loss, while people who have experienced near-death episodes (not 
to mention yogis and saints who have grown used to living in the light) report profound 
spiritual changes. 

If the brain normally filters out an entire range of experience, as we know it does, perhaps 
our crudest access to higher dimensions is unfortunately through damage or deprivation. The 
brain has to adjust itself to any higher experience. It takes brain waves to turn the whirling, 
chaotic energy of the quantum soup into recognizable images and thoughts. Hunt makes the 
point that if you measure the brain activity of someone who is willing to have a spiritual 
experience, who isn't stuck or blocked, the patterns are very different from someone who is 
blocked. Going beyond her EEG measurements, Hunt has correlated five states of 
psychological stuckness that shut out spirituality. All are rooted in some initial experience — a 
brush with God — that the person cannot integrate into the sense of self that already existed. 
The five blocked experiences are as follows: 

1 . The experience of a God-like energy or presence. 

2. Suddenly comprehending past, present, and future as one. 

3. Gaining the power to heal. 

4. Unanswered prayers in the midst of a "good" life — the experience of being forsaken 
by God. 

5. Sensory overload to the nervous system when "the light" enters. 

Although related, these are distinct experiences, and when any befall a person, there is often a 
sense of shock and dismay, despite the fact that something positive may be happening. 

One could reasonably claim that Christianity itself might not have survived if Saul had not 
been blinded by the light on the road to Damascus, when Jesus uttered the words "Why do 
you persecute me?" But this overwhelming experience included some of the obstacles listed 
above. Saul's entire belief structure was challenged. His sudden exposure to God as a full- 
blown reality had to be integrated, and this provoked tremendous struggle within. The sensory 
overload of the experience caused physical blindness for a number of days. The Buddha 
sitting under the Bodhi tree, determined to break free of the binding influence of the mind, 


was volunteering for the same inner struggle. What is common to any spiritual breakthrough 
is that strong opposition is never far away. For example, 


Neurotic defenses such as "I am unworthy” or "I have low self-esteem " are 
triggered. 

Anxiety that an evil or satanic force is at work arises; these may he expressed as 
fear of insanity or the belief that delusions are being caused from the outside. 

The self vainly tries to hold together along its old patterns, fearing change as a 
form of death. 

The absence of a sign from God, such as a voice or vision, makes the experience 
seem unreal, detached from this world. 

The habit of being in duality, of seeing past, present, and future as separate states, 
does not want to be broken down. 

All in all, the mind's journey back to God can have serious repercussions just in terms of 
the brain adapting to a new mode of perception. This was made clear to me by an accident 
that recently befell a close friend. Unaccustomed to working out at the gym, he strained on 
one machine and injured his right foot. Over the next few days he began to feel increasing 
pain whenever he put any weight on that foot, until after a few weeks he could hardly walk a 
block without having to sit down. On medical examination it was found that he had a common 
ailment known as planar fascitis, in which the connecting tissue between the heel and the 
front of the foot have been stretched or torn. The condition can sometimes be improved 
through specific exercises; severe cases can require surgery, which isn’t always successful. 

My friend, a stoic type, decided to tough out the pain and made only sporadic attempts to 
do the required exercises. In time he found it so difficult to walk, however, that in desperation 
he sought out a Chinese healer. "I went to his office, which was just a small room in the back 
of a kung fu studio. He was a short man in his fifties who gave no evidence of being mystical 
or spiritual, or in any way gifted in healing. But his treatment was remarkable," my friend 
recalls. 

"After gently feeling my foot, he stood up and made a few signs in the air behind my 
spine. He never actually touched me, and when I asked what he was doing, he said simply that 
he was turning some switches in my energy field. He did this for a minute or so and then 
asked me to stand up. I did, and there was no sensation of pain, not the slightest. You have to 
remember that I had limped in, barely able to walk. 

"In complete amazement I asked him what he had done. He told me that the body was an 
image projected by the mind, and in a state of health the mind keeps this image intact and 
balanced. However, injury and pain can cause us to withdraw our attention from the affected 
spot. In that case, the body image starts to deteriorate; its energy patterns become impaired, 
unhealthy. So the healer restores the correct pattern — this is done instantly, on the spot — after 
which the patient's own mind takes responsibility for maintaining it that way. 

"I stood up on the foot and walked around, just to be sure that I wasn't fooling myself. As I 
was doing this, the healer told me casually that I could be trained to do the same sort of work. 
'Really?' I said. What would it take to be able to accomplish something like this? He 
answered, 'You only have to discard the belief that it is impossible.'" 

To this day my friend has had no recurrence of pain, which is remarkable enough. But here 
is the spiritual moral of the story: This healing did not change my friend's life. His 
assumptions about his body remained intact — he didn’t begin to see it as a ghostly image or a 
mask for hidden energies. Belief is incredibly powerful; it can imprint the brain so deeply that 
even the most remarkable experience doesn't bring any breakthrough into a new reality. My 
friend's old beliefs were nudged aside slightly, but that is all. One impossible event was not 



enough to overcome spiritual stuckness. (Christ's reluctance to perform miracles seemed to be 
based on a similar realization.) 

As a child I felt left out spiritually because I would never meet Buddha or Krishna, and my 
eyes would never see someone raised from the dead or water turned to wine. Now I realize 
that it isn't the miracle that creates the believer. Instead, we are all believers. We believe that 
the illusion of the material world is completely real. That belief is our only prison. It prevents 
us from making the journey into the unknown. To date, after many centuries of saints, sages, 
and seers, only a few individuals can open to radical change in their belief system, while most 
cannot. Even so, our beliefs must eventually shift to conform to reality, since in the quantum 
world, belief creates reality. As we will see, our true home is the light, and our true role is to 
create endlessly from the infinite storehouse of possibilities located at the virtual level. 


Five 

STRANGE POWERS 


...for all things are possible with God. 
—MARK 10:27 


"I'm the kind of person the church would call lost. Growing up, I didn't have much faith in 
myself or anything else. If anybody had asked whether I believed in God, I would have said, 
'Why should I? He doesn't believe in me.’" 

A twenty-four-year-old medical technician was talking about his working-class childhood. 
In his family, the mother was a devout Catholic, the father a casual believer who stayed home 
on Sunday while the children were dragged off to Mass. 

"Once when I was thirteen, my father and I were walking through downtown Boston, and 
we passed a street beggar. The guy held out his hand without saying anything. I noticed my 
father give him a dirty look. We kept walking. In a faint voice behind us the beggar mumbled, 
'God bless you.' My father got very angry. 'There's faith for you,' he said sarcastically. 'I work 
for thirty years and that guy doesn't lift a finger to help himself. Every night he leaves it to 



Providence whether he gets to eat or have a place to sleep. Faith doesn't get much greater than 
that.'" 

The story illustrates how religious faith clashes head-on with the necessities of life. If there 
are two realities competing for our allegiance, the material and the spiritual, why should we 
abandon the material? A cynical Arabic saying advises, "Trust in God but tie up your camels." 
And since God doesn't interfere to bring even the bare necessities to millions of poor people, 
disbelief makes sense. 

Yet disbelief doesn't seem to work, either. There are mysterious phenomena that can be 
explained only in terms of an invisible domain that is our source in the sacred. It is the home 
of our intelligence and our sense of order in the universe. To prove that such a place exists, 
we look to a vast range of anomalies on the fringes of ordinary events. These include religious 
awakening and "going into the light," which we have already covered, but also the following: 

Inspiration and insight 

Geniuses, child prodigies, and savants 

Memory of former lifetimes 

Telepathy and ESP 

Alter egos (multiple personality syndrome) 

Synchronicity 

Clairvoyance and prophecy 

Diverse as they are, these fringe phenomena all take us beyond our present knowledge of 
the brain into the regions of the "mind field" that are closest to God. The brain is a receiver of 
mind, like a radio receiving signals from a faraway source. If a battery-operated radio were 
dropped from the sky into the midst of a primitive society, its members might wind up 
worshiping it, because there would be no one who would understand about how music and 
voices could be emitted from this mystical box. 

Right now the brain also resembles a mystical box. We utilize it in very chaotic ways, 
however, which is why the ultimate signals — the ones sent by God — often pass unnoticed. 
After sixty years of exploring the paranormal, and many years of experiencing music, genius, 
insight, and inspiration, there are still many spiritual connections yet to be made. We will be 
working on those connections in the following sections, and as we do it will become clearer 
that quantum reality — the zone of miracles — is a place very nearby. 


INSPIRATION AND INSIGHT 


If the brain produces thoughts, and these are the result of stored information inside our 
neurons, how does anyone ever have a new idea? Why aren't we constantly combining and 
recombining old information? New thoughts come to us from the mind, not the brain. The 
most original new thoughts are called inspired; on the personal level seeing something new 
about yourself is called an insight. When you feel inspired, more than ordinary thinking is 
involved. There is a sense of being uplifted, of suddenly breaking through. Old boundaries fall 
away, and one feels, if only for a moment, a rush of liberation. If the inspiration is powerful 
enough, one's whole life can be changed. There are insights so potent that years of patterned 
behavior can change in an instant. 

Let's look more closely at how insight works, because it is very revealing about the mind. 

A woman who was in therapy showed up at her psychiatrist's office in a state of outrage. She 
declared that her best friend, Maxine, had committed a terrible personal betrayal. When asked 



how, she told this story: the two of them were in the last year of law school and had belonged 
to the same study group. A serious and competitive person, the woman had done everything to 
help Maxine, providing extensive notes, catching lectures that her friend couldn't attend, and 
even going so far as to bring food to the group if study hours ran late into the night. 

In other words, she considered herself a model of support. The time for finals came, and 
the two friends spent many hours outside the group preparing for all the possible areas to be 
covered. During the exam the woman was distressed to find that she was unprepared in one 
key area. She had forgotten to study an important Supreme Court case, and she missed all the 
questions devoted to it. She consoled herself with the feeling that at least she could share her 
misery with her best friend. But when grades were posted, Maxine had done much better than 
she had, and when asked how this happened, the friend casually dropped that she had studied 
that particular case on her own. 

"All right," the therapist said, "I see all that, but why are you so outraged?" 

"You have to ask?" the woman protested. "She betrayed me. She was supposed to be my 
best friend. I've done everything for her, bent over backward to get her through law school. 
Now look what she has done." 

"Did she do it intentionally?" the therapist asked. "Or was she just looking out for herself? 
Maybe she meant to tell you, but then she forgot." 

The woman set her jaw. "That's not the way you treat a best friend," she maintained. 
"Maxine obviously doesn't care what happens to me." 

If you look beneath the surface, you'll find two deeper layers to this incident. The first 
layer is psychological and was addressed by the therapist. He didn't see a simple falling-out 
between friends. His patient was exhibiting all the signs of a severe control defense. Being a 
perfectionist, taking care of other people's needs even when not asked, taking charge of 
situations on the assumption that others cannot look out for themselves, and implicitly 
wanting to be thanked for one's trouble — all these are glaring signs. But how could this 
insight be transferred from therapist to patient? 

"You think Maxine betrayed you," the psychiatrist said. "But actually she is the normal 
one here. It is perfectly normal to look out for oneself. She had no obligation to share every 
detail of her study habits with you." 

The woman was astonished to hear this and very resistant to it. "You are taking her side?" 
she asked in bewilderment. "But what about me?" 

"It is you I am concerned with. What you haven't been able to see is that there is a piece of 
reality you can't face. All this help and concern you showed toward Maxine is fine, but it 
serves to keep you defended from what you can't accept." 

"And what is that?" 

"Listen carefully," the therapist replied. "Other people have a right to reject you, and there 
is nothing you can do about it." 

The woman sat back, perplexed and upset. The words had been heard, but they hadn't 
really sunk in. She hesitated on the brink of insight. From her perspective, her actions were 
those of a betrayed saint. The alternative would be to see herself in a new light, as someone 
who for years had been "taking care" of others in an attempt to make sure that no one, 
absolutely no one, ever rejected her. 

As it happened, she took the leap: the insight was accepted. Ahead lay several months of 
anguish as pent-up fear and grief poured out. The defense of her old behavior was gone, and 
now the hidden energies trapped so long inside could find release. 

Earlier I mentioned that there was a second layer to this story, which is spiritual. Insight is 
one thing, but the impulse to find it is another. Must we accept that this was a random event in 
this woman's life? Or did a deeper layer of her self provide a situation that opened a door? I 
believe that life events do not unfold randomly; our materialistic worldview may insist that 



they do, but all of us have reflected on turning points in our lives and seen, sometimes with 
bafflement or wonder, that lessons came our way at exactly the time we needed them. 

In a word, some hidden intelligence seems to know when and how to transform us, often 
when we least expect it. By its nature, inspiration is transforming — it brings in spirit — and no 
model of the brain has come close to explaining how a cluster of neurons could transform 
itself. One school of neurology is predicated on the notion that the human brain is a computer 
of enormous ability, but computers don't wake up one morning and decide to have a new 
attitude toward life. Nor do they have moments of spiritual awakening, whereas human beings 
experience them all the time. Computers don't find any idea suddenly meaningful. For them 
every download of data is the same, a collection of zeros and ones arranged in a coded 
language. Yesterday's E-mail is no less significant than the New Testament, and no more. 

Inspiration is the perfect example of how the invisible level of reality works. Whatever is 
needed is provided. A person may not be prepared to accept the insight, and therefore a 
chance for transformation will be missed. But that isn't the essential point. The mind is greater 
than any individual. Your mind isn't a computer; it is a living intelligence, and it evolves, 
which is why fresh insight is needed. 

In the primitive stages of evolution, life became more complex physically — green algae 
made the leap to becoming plants, for example, by developing a more complex ability to use 
sunlight. Higher evolution takes place in the mind, as when an Einstein is produced, for 
example. But the leap from algae to plants was a leap of intelligence, a moment of inspiration, 
just as much as the discovery of relativity. Unlike the brain, the mind can take leaps; it breaks 
through old limitations and glories in feeling free. 

At every level, to be inspired is a step toward greater liberation, and liberation is a choice. 
Cells that evolved into plants, flowers, and trees moved ahead of blue-green algae, but at the 
same time, the lower level of evolution continued to exist as long as it served the 
environment. 

At the moment of insight, there is an "aha!" that opens up new possibilities. At the moment 
the Buddha was enlightened, there was no further reason for any form of violence or suffering 
among humankind. Buddha saw that suffering and evil are rooted in a mistake about how life 
works. He saw that the endless struggle to achieve pleasure and avoid pain would never end 
as long as we were attached to our ego needs. The ego's selfishness and insecurity would 
never heal by themselves; there would always be another battle to fight. 

This insight came to Gautama under the Bodhi tree, just as it came to Jesus in the desert 
when he struggled with Satan (one could say the same of any great master or teacher). The 
fact that the mass of humanity still dwells in ignorance, giving rise to all kinds of suffering, 
goes back to levels of awareness. In the domain of the mind there is both freedom and 
attachment; we make the choice which to attune to. Each person sets his own boundaries and 
breaks through them when the evolutionary impulse is felt. 

We've all met people whose problems are completely unnecessary, yet they lack the 
insight to find the solution. Try to give them this insight, hand it to them on a platter, and still 
they won’t take it. Insight and inspiration must be sought and then allowed to dawn. As our 
spiritual masters indicate, this is the kind of knowledge you must tune into. Inspiration 
teaches us that transformation must begin with trust that a higher intelligence exists and 
knows how to contact us. 


GENIUSES, CHILD PRODIGIES, AND SAVANTS 



Brain research has little to say about genius that is very convincing. Statistically we know that 
geniuses are rare and unpredictable; they are predominantly born in ordinary families, and 
their own offspring are rarely of exceptional intelligence. This leads us to believe that genius 
derives from a unique combination of genes — it is somehow encoded from birth in a very few 
children. 

Under autopsy the cerebral cortex of geniuses is only rarely found to be exceptional. (In 
June 1999, headlines were created by the news that Einstein’s brain, preserved for almost half 
a century after his death, was indeed abnormal. A center that is connected to mathematical 
ability and spatial perception known as the inferior parietal lobe was found to be 15 percent 
wider than normal in Einstein's case. Is this proof of genius? Hardly, but there is an almost 
universal craving to think that geniuses are "different." I would argue that our brains are wired 
by our minds to begin with, and it is the genius of Einstein’s mind, not the radio apparatus 
under the skull that received its signals, that is fascinating.) 

If DNA does not endow geniuses with special structures in their gray matter, then how do 
genes play a part? After all, unless a gene gives rise to a physical expression, it has no way to 
influence us. You cannot turn an ordinary brain into a genius's brain, either, and in fact the 
electrical patterns exhibited when a genius is thinking are not dramatically different from my 
brain waves when I add up my checkbook. 

In our new model genius would be defined as something nonphysical: the ability to 
activate unmanifest levels of the mind much more efficiently than usual. Contrary to the 
popular assumption that geniuses think all the time, their minds are in fact quieter and clearer 
than normal. This clarity may be narrow, however. Geniuses can be plagued by the same 
mental obstacles as the rest of us, only they have achieved one or more open channels back to 
the mind field. 

Mozart, for example, had difficulty managing the simplest financial affairs; his emotional 
life was torn between two women; feelings about his father filled his unconscious with 
suppressed anger and resentment. But the channel of music was so open that Mozart could 
compose freely from the age of four onward, and in his prime had little difficulty seeing 
whole pages of a score in his head at once. 

Genius is beyond ordinary thought and learning — we could call it continuous inspiration. 
The same process is involved in a burst of inspiration, but a genius has these bursts longer and 
with more ease than the rest of us. This brings up an important point: you can only access the 
mind field at your own comfort level. Your brain and nervous system become fine-tuned to 
who you are. If you are a civil engineer, your brain becomes accustomed to schematic 
diagrams, tensile stresses, and so forth. Should you suddenly begin to receive musical 
inspiration on the order of Mozart, your personal world would be thrown into chaos. 

In California a stockbroker who had no interest in art began to paint canvases of bright- 
colored ellipses, often in yellow or purple. He startled his friends by beginning to wear clothes 
in the same bright hues. Emotionally distant from his children as they grew up, he suddenly 
became more affectionate toward them and seemed less stressed than he had been for years. 
All of these developments were somehow linked to a change in his visual perception, which 
caused objects to catch his eye as they never had before. At times a color might be intensely 
pleasurable in a way he had never experienced, while other colors were intensely painful or 
caused him to feel sick. 

His fascination with color led to a deepening desire to paint; this passion grew so dominant 
that he retired from his profession to devote himself to his art. As events progressed, however, 
a darker side emerged to his transformation from broker to amateur Picasso: his memory 
began to fail, accompanied by the onset of compulsive behaviors such as searching 
obsessively for lost coins on the street. He became erratically angry and had fits of depression. 
When these symptoms blossomed into impaired speech and further loss of memory, a UCLA 



neurologist named Bruce Miller diagnosed a specific rare disease, an early dementia or 
senility brought on by the gradual destruction of the frontal lobes of the brain. 

As a rule patients with dementia do not develop anything positive or life-enhancing from 
their disorder. But Miller found that in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) a significant number 
of patients gain sudden talent in music, photography, art, and other creative areas. Although 
FTD had been known for a hundred years, this particular aspect, which remains mysterious, 
was a new discovery. (1) 

The blossoming of talent is always temporary. The brain's deterioration worsens gradually 
over time until complete mental derangement results. In the stockbroker's case, his art 
improved for several years. Fiis early fascination with bright colors developed into complex 
designs — intricately detailed flowers, birds, and animals emerged and were sold at gallery 
prices. A single-minded obsessive talent was bom from the ashes of a declining brain. 

This phenomenon is not unprecedented. Famously ill geniuses include Dostoevsky, 
afflicted with epilepsy, and Van Gogh, who suffered from an undiagnosed disorder that could 
have been schizophrenia, epilepsy, or the ravages of advanced alcoholism. Although they 
never gained fame, certain chronic schizophrenics have painted canvases in which faces peer 
out at us with distorted, horrific, yet fascinating expressions; sometimes these are 
accompanied by obsessive attention to tiny details, spiderwebs of lines woven by fixated 
minds. Yet in the vast majority of cases the balancing act between art and madness eventually 
tips over into chaos; the beautiful patterns become scrambled, frantic jigsaws as the disease 
overwhelms the art. 

Some psychiatrists have concluded that insanity has the power to incite creativity, but in 
the case of dementia, there is such disastrous deterioration of the cortex itself that one 
wonders where any gift could be coming from. Somehow genius, and in rare instances 
disease, produces wonders of art by opening the brain to regions of awareness unknown in 
"normal" life. 

Child prodigies are at the extreme end of genius. Einstein was not a child prodigy, which 
means that he didn't have fully formed mathematical skill from the age of ten or younger. His 
genius was more attuned to an overall vision, not to technical details. Yet some genius is 
totally formed at birth, it seems, and there is no material explanation for it. 

All our current models of the brain indicate that it is unformed at birth and needs 
experience to mature. If you bandage a kitten's eyes as soon as it is born and leave the 
blindfold on for just a few weeks, its brain will not have the experience of light. Without that, 
the visual centers cannot develop, and the kitten will be blind for life. If you don't expose a 
newborn baby to language, it will never learn to speak. There is even evidence that early 
deprivation of love and nurturing will leave a lifelong void that later experience cannot fill, or 
only with great difficulty. In all these cases the experience flowing in from the outer 
environment shapes the so-called hardwiring of the cerebral cortex. The primitive, unformed 
network of neurons that a newborn brings into this world isn't like a computer's wiring. 
Neurons need to interact with all kinds of stimuli before they can form the infinitely ordered, 
flexible, and efficient network of a mature brain. 

According to this model, it should be impossible for the Russian pianist Evgeny Kissin, the 
most famous musical prodigy of the present generation (he is now nearly thirty), to have 
displayed musical ability almost at birth. And yet his mother, who took her baby to market in 
Moscow as she stood in line for food, vividly recalls that her one-year-old hummed Bach 
inventions in perfect pitch as the other mothers stared in disbelief. And as soon as Evgeny 
could toddle, he made his way to the family piano and began to pick out the same Bach 
exercises that he had heard his older sister practicing. These were just the first signs exhibited 
by a child prodigy who was composing music at six and performing both Chopin piano 


concertos in a single concert at the age of thirteen — a prodigious feat even for an 
accomplished virtuoso. 

A child's unformed brain could not accomplish these feats. Normal development consists 
of month after month of random experimentation on a child’s part, testing one ability after 
another until the desirable skills (walking, talking, feeding oneself, toilet training) gradually 
emerge from the undesirable ones (wetting the bed, making mumbling sounds, crawling on 
hands and knees). There may be a musical gene that might enable one person to carry a tune 
while another is tone deaf, but a gene alone can't coordinate all the incredible gifts of a child 
prodigy. It takes a trained mind to decisively develop one ability out of raw experience. We 
have to remember that the infant brain must somehow take its stock of 100 billion neurons, all 
intricately layered but not exposed as yet to the first sight, sound, desire, wish, fantasy, dream, 
frustration, or fulfillment, and with this soup of raw cells make networks and connections that 
will last a lifetime. It is astonishing to think that prodigies are doing all that while also 
developing their one, laserlike talent. 

And that is where the unmanifest domain helps us, because a prodigy doesn't come out of 
nowhere; he is formed by invisible intelligence that has somehow (no one knows exactly) 
decided to speed up the learning process far beyond the normal pace, leaving nothing to 
chance, not even the environment. Kissin's family happened to own a piano, but musical 
geniuses have been bom in families with no musical background, and math prodigies 
regularly appear in nonscientific settings. Somehow or other, they still unerringly find their 
gift. Mind shapes brain, not the other way around. The intelligence that courses through you is 
turning you into what you are going to be. 

Rarely super-prodigies emerge whose abilities are not confined to a single talent but 
encompass all mental activity; these children are estimated to fall within the top one-quarter 
of 1 percent of IQs measured worldwide. A current example is a boy who could recite the 
alphabet before he was a year old; by eighteen months he could read and memorize books. 

His mind proved to be omnivorous for knowledge, leading him to complete grades one 
through twelve by the time he was eight. "I knew my child would surpass me intellectually," 
his mother was quoted as saying. "I just didn’t know it would happen when he was six." 

Prodigies are not the most inexplicable sort of genius, however; that honor belongs to idiot 
savants, people with severe mental defects who exhibit extraordinary abilities at the same 
time. An idiot savant isn't a complete genius. Usually a single clear channel has been opened 
to a deep level of the mind field, but with corresponding weakness in other areas. A savant 
may be able to instantly multiply long numbers, to name the day of the week for any date 
thousands of years forward or backward in time, or even to calculate square roots beyond the 
ability of mainframe computers. At the same time, however, such a person may not be able to 
pick out the right change for the bus or to learn simple reading skills. 

Among currently living savants there is one who can recall any license plate number, 
going back a dozen years. Another has mastery of fifteen foreign languages, including good to 
excellent knowledge of some of the world's most difficult tongues, including Finnish, Welsh, 
Hindi, and Mandarin Chinese. A native speaker of English, this particular savant once got lost 
on the streets of Paris and was found hours later cheerfully translating between two groups of 
tourists, one Greek, the other German. On his own, however, he was not mentally capable of 
finding his way back to his nearby hotel. This particular savant can also read writing held 
upside down or sideways. 

Only recently has medicine put a name to this mysterious phenomenon, which is now 
called "autistic savant syndrome." As the name implies, usually savants are autistic, prone to 
extreme introversion and obsessive-compulsive behavior; the syndrome is five times more 
likely to strike males than females. Researchers have been able to pinpoint certain brain 
anomalies, especially left-hemisphere damage, which causes the right hemisphere to 



compensate with extraordinary abilities. The right brain dominates in music, art, and 
unconscious calculating abilities, all of which are common among savants. (Why there is no 
such compensation among other autistic children is not known.) 

Yet does this fully account for such a bizarre mixture of genius and mental deficiency? (2) 
For one thing, mastery of foreign languages would be a left-brain activity, so the theory that 
the right hemisphere is compensating for left-brain damage doesn't always hold true. More 
important, there is no known mechanism by which a deficient brain that cannot organize 
simple reasoning abilities should suddenly develop supernormal ones. Instead we might 
speculate that the idiot savant is like a reckless explorer. Some impulse has led him to cross 
certain frontiers far ahead of normal minds, while at the same time not paying attention to 
basic necessities. 

One savant was almost helpless as a child, a victim of severe retardation, cerebral palsy, 
and blindness. He was kept in an orphanage at birth until his adoption by a compassionate 
couple. Not until the age of fourteen was it discovered that he was a musical prodigy. One 
night his parents awoke to hear someone playing the Tchaikovsky first piano concerto 
downstairs in the middle of the night. They were astonished to find that it was their adopted 
son, who had never been exposed to a piano and was far too retarded to take music lessons. 
Once his savantism emerged, however, he could play any piece of piano music, however 
complex, after hearing it only once, a feat beyond even a trained professional. Yet this same 
young man could not manage the simple tasks of cooking, buying clothes, or holding a job. 

Such wide disparities are examples of imbalance, not just on the material level but on the 
level where one's inner life gets organized. The unmanifest domain is beyond time, and yet 
one of its responsibilities is to organize the world over time. When a rose progresses from 
winter to spring, it could not survive by releasing the chemicals that would make it go 
dormant when the genes for blossoming are required. A rose is attuned to the rhythm of the 
seasons, responding to the slightest changes in daylight and temperature, the angle of the sun, 
and the moisture in the soil. 

We are more fortunate than a rose, since we are not a prisoner of the seasons, but in 
another sense we are much less fortunate, because we can misuse our freedom of choice and 
turn to self-destructive behavior. The idiot savant has somehow made some drastic choices 
inside his mind, and although the intelligence of nature does not snatch away the gift of 
genius, it does not erase the wrong decisions, either. Our own lives obey the same principle — 
it is common for anyone to have mastered one aspect of life, such as earning money, while 
being very poor at another, such as maintaining a loving relationship. In all cases of 
imbalance, events will be organized to bring the weak parts into focus, even though it is still 
our own choice whether or not to follow where nature wants to lead us. All these examples of 
genius, even though they have no obvious spiritual lesson to teach, point to the possibility that 
the mind can organize an infinite number of ingredients. God's mind feels very close at this 
point. We are not there yet, but genius is like a window into infinite possibilities. 


MEMORY OF FORMER LIFETIMES 


Who were you before you were you? The possibility of an afterlife is widely argued in the 
West, but the existence of a before-life is just as likely. If you believe only in an afterlife, you 
are restricted to a very limited, dualistic view of time. There is only "here" and "after." But if 
life is continuous, if the soul never stops making its journey, a completely different worldview 
opens up. 


As part of our medical training in India, every young doctor was sent to a village posting, 
which was the equivalent of doing public health service. Rural India exists exactly as it did in 
centuries past, and after the urban culture of New Delhi, the shock of village life feels like 
time travel. One day in my mud dispensary patients began running outside for no reason. I 
stepped outside to find that a crowd had gathered around a little girl standing barefoot in the 
dusty road. She was four or five, and apparently she had appeared from nowhere. Her name, 
she said, was Neela. It's a common enough name in northern India, but after a few moments 
the little girl began calling one or two of the villagers by name, people she had never met 
before. She was gathered up in someone's arms and earned into a nearby house; on the way, 
however, she pointed to this dwelling and that and made remarks as if she knew them. 

Within an hour her frantic parents showed up. They had stopped by the side of the main 
road in their car, and while unpacking for lunch, the mother noticed that Neela had wandered 
off. There was a tearful reunion with the little girl. Then the questions began: How had Neela 
walked the long distance, more than a mile, from the roadside stopping point to the village? 
How had her parents known to look for her there? 

The answer was very strange and yet very Indian. Neela, it turned out, was not her real 
name, but Gita. As soon as she learned to talk, Gita had kept pointing to herself and saying, 
"Neela, Neela." 

Naturally everyone believed that Gita was a reincarnation. The locals considered the 
matter, and it wasn't long before someone remembered another Neela, a little girl who had 
died young on one of the surrounding farms. Someone would have run off to fetch the family 
who lived there, but Gita's parents became quite nervous. Despite protests, they grabbed up 
their daughter and sped away in the car. Gita cried as they took her away, staring out the back 
window as the vehicle receded in a cloud of dust. To my knowledge she never returned. 

Many similar incidents of overlapping lifetimes crop up, and not just in the East. Some 
years back it made news when the search for a reincarnated high Tibetan lama took a 
delegation of priests to Spain. There a small Catholic baby was identified as a likely 
candidate. How do boundaries of birth and death become so thin? People who spend time 
with geniuses and prodigies often find them unearthly, somehow preternatural, as if a very old 
soul has been confined to a new body and yet brings in experience far beyond what that body 
could have known. It is easy to credit that some kind of former life is casting its influence on 
the present. Speaking of his own experience, one musical prodigy stated, "It is as if I am 
playing from outside my own consciousness. The music comes through me. I am the conduit, 
not the source." 

Does the same effect apply to all of us? Reincarnation is a contentious subject; the Eastern 
world has adopted it for thousands of years, while the Judeo-Christian tradition has only 
flirted with the concept and for the most part rejected it. During the Middle Ages belief in 
earlier lives amounted to heresy. 

The unmanifest domain allows us to see this issue a different way. We can frame the 
notion of former lives as one of awareness. To be aware means that you can activate either a 
small or a large part of your mind. Some people are keenly aware of their deeper motives, 
their subconscious emotions, or their creative ability, while other people are closed off. Seers 
and sages activate deep regions, seeing into human nature as it applies far beyond their own 
lives. A humble monk in a cave in the Himalayas may be capable of peering into my soul far 
more clearly than I can (I have had this experience, in fact). So it would seem that the mind 
isn't limited by experience — all of us have had moments when we know much more than we 
should. 

There is much evidence that the mind is not confined by time and space. Because the brain 
is located inside the head, we assume that the mind is as well, looking out at the world like a 
prisoner in a tower. When you say, "I've got this idea running through my head," you operate 



from this assumption. But awareness is more than ideas and much more even than brain 
function. I can remember sitting on a bed in a cheap motel watching a crime scene on 
television. I was twenty-four, it was my first night in America, and the violence I saw on the 
eleven o'clock news was shockingly new to me. I leaned forward, watching the gunshot 
victims being carted on gurneys into a local hospital. Suddenly my stomach turned over. 

They were going to the hospital where I was supposed to report the next day. The 
emergency room that was scrambling to remove bullets and crack open chests to massage 
stopped hearts would be my workplace in twelve hours. I had an unreal feeling as I saw 
myself being swept into all this American mayhem. The blood staining the sidewalk would 
soon be on my hands; I would be saving patients who might be policemen or murderers. 

I was very emotional at that moment, caught between fascination and dread, and emotions 
create strong memories. I can feel and see the scene vividly anytime I want to. Is the memory 
inside my head? If so, then how is it that you are experiencing it as you read this page? Some 
version of my memory, however faint, has transferred itself to you. You saw an image, you 
felt a feeling. How did an event supposedly trapped inside my skull get inside yours without 
passing through something in between? 

The brilliant British biologist and researcher in evolutionary theory Rupert Sheldrake has 
devised extremely clever experiments that turn on this very riddle. For example, he gave 
English-speaking children several groups of Japanese words and asked them which ones were 
poetry. Even though they knew not a word of Japanese, the children could pick out the verses 
with remarkable accuracy, as if they heard the difference between ordinary sentences, or even 
nonsense syllables, and delicate haikus. How did this knowledge get into their heads? Is it 
floating in the air or available through a planetary mind that we all share? 

Just as a quantum of energy can leap between two points without crossing the space in 
between, so apparently can a thought. A field of awareness flows in, around, and through each 
of us. Some of this awareness is localized. We say "my" memory and "my" thoughts, but that 
isn't the whole story. A neuron can't claim "this is my idea" until millions of cells have come 
together to form each image or thought. Their ability to communicate doesn't require them to 
touch. Millions of heart cells that keep the same cardiac rhythm do not touch, either. The 
coordination of brain or heart depends on an invisible electrical field whose minute charges 
establish patterns among billions of tiny individual cells. A heart in which the electrical field 
becomes jumbled begins to writhe in agony as each cell loses contact with the others; the 
effect is like a bag of worms pulsing violently until the heart deprives itself of oxygen to the 
point of death. (This is known as fibrillation, one symptom of a heart attack.) 

Awareness seems to be an even more subtle field, not only invisible but needing no 
energy. When you picked up my old memory, no electrical or magnetic current passed 
between us. The simple act of recognizing a friend on the street contains a similar mystery. 
When you see a familiar face, your brain doesn't run through its catalog of all known faces to 
arrive at who your friend is. A computer would have to do that, consuming energy as it did so. 
But your brain doesn’t scan its entire memory bank when it sees a strange or a familiar face — 
what we call recognition takes place instantly, at a deeper level of awareness. 

Awareness does need chemical links. In your immune system a T cell floating past an 
invading virus recognizes it and goes on the attack. It recognizes the enemy according to the 
chemical coding on the outside of the germ, which has to match another coding on the outside 
of the T cell before any kind of alert is sent via messenger molecules throughout the body. A 
few cold viruses or pneumococci are enough to put billions of immune cells on alert. 

However, such a chemical explanation of immunity fails to solve some basic issues. Why 
does a T cell let in the AIDS virus without fighting it? 

The answer given by virologists focuses on the outside coating of the HIV vims, a 
deceptive code of molecules that disguises itself in such a way that it can sneak past the 



corresponding coding on the outside of the T cell — rather like a guerilla warrior using 
underground tactics instead of a frontal assault. If this is so, how did HIV learn to do this? 
Chemicals are neutral; they have no awareness built into them. Therefore to a chemical it is 
insignificant whether the HIV vims or the T cell survives. Yet to the cells that is all- 
important. This leads us to ask how a cell learns to reproduce in the first place. DNA is 
composed of simple sugars and bits of protein that never divide or reproduce, no matter how 
many billions of years they exist. What step caused these simple molecules to get together, 
arrange themselves in a pattern with billions of tiny segments, and all of a sudden leam to 
divide? 

One plausible answer is that an invisible organizing principle is at work. The need for life 
to reproduce itself is fundamental; the need for chemicals to reproduce themselves is nil. So 
even at this most basic level, we see certain qualities of awareness — recognition, memory, 
self-preservation, and identity — coming into play. Now add the element of time. It isn't 
enough for DNA just to reproduce itself randomly; that is the behavior of cancer, which 
reproduces without regard and eventually engulfs its host, leading to its own death. 

To form a baby, a single fertilized cell must be a master of timing. Every organ of the body 
exists in seed form within a single strand of DNA, yet to emerge correctly, they must take 
their turn. For the first days and weeks, an embryo is called a zygote or seed; it is an 
undifferentiated mass of similar cells. But very soon one cell starts to give off chemicals 
unique to itself. Even though the mother cells are identical, some of the offspring know, for 
example, that they are meant to be brain cells. As such, they need to specialize, growing into 
far different shapes than muscle or bone cells. This they do with amazing precision, but in 
addition they send out signals to attract other proto-brain cells. Like attracts like, and as brain 
cells float toward each other, they cross paths with proto-heart, proto-kidney, and proto- 
stomach cells, none of them getting in the way or causing a confusion of identity. 

This spectacle is far more astonishing than the eye can see. Visibly there is nothing but a 
soup of cells swimming around and forming patterns. Yet think of it: a baby brain cell 
somehow knows who it is going to be in advance. For many weeks a neuron is developing its 
structure, not yet mature but no longer undifferentiated, either. How does it keep track of its 
purpose in life with so many billions of signals being sent all around it? This is as mysterious 
a question as asking how a T cell first learned to recognize an enemy before meeting one. 
Memory, learning, and identity precede matter; they govern matter. If a cluster of brain cells 
misses even one beat, if a cerebral cell floats up to its assigned layer of the brain but gets 
slightly clogged in traffic, bunching up instead of spreading out into an even layering, the 
result is that the baby will be born with dyslexia. How did such a mishap occur, given that 
brains have been evolving for tens of millions of years, whereas reading a book is at most 
three thousand years old? It would have made no difference to a Neanderthal brain whether 
the word God looked like the word dog, yet a newborn neuron has been able to avoid that 
mistake for eons in advance of the invention of language. 

I conclude that the field of awareness is our true home, and that awareness contains the 
secrets of evolution, not the body or even DNA. This shared home is "the light" spoken of by 
mystics; it is the potential for life and intelligence, and it is life and intelligence once they 
appear. Your mind is one focus of this cosmic awareness, but it doesn't belong to you like a 
possession. Just as your body is held together by inner awareness, there is a flow of awareness 
outside you. If you consider for a moment, you can catalog many common experiences that 
require you to be outside your brain. Have you ever felt that someone is watching you behind 
your back, only to turn around and find that in fact someone is there? We've all finished a 
friend's sentence or exclaimed, "I was thinking the same thing!" on the heels of another 
person's thought. 



A woman told me about standing on the Pacific shore in Oregon worrying about her dying 
father. She looked up at the sunset and saw his face in her mind, while his voice distinctly 
said, "Forgive me." Later that night the woman called her sister, and it turned out that she had 
had the same vision and heard the same words. As an exercise I sometimes encourage a group 
of people to try to go beyond their limited perception — I call this "going into your virtual 
body." Each person sits with eyes closed and gives himself permission to travel anywhere the 
impulse wants to go. The images that come to mind don’t have to be judged, only accepted 
and allowed to flow. One woman, who was single and living with her boyfriend, saw him 
cleaning out the closet at home, startling only because he had never done such a thing. The 
image was vivid, as if she were right there with him, and apparently she was, because when 
she called home, he had a surprise for her — he had completely cleaned and rearranged her 
closet so that she could get at her things more easily. 

Now let's return to the original question: Who were you before you were you? Even 
though we all identify with a very limited slice of time and space, equating "me" with one 
body and one mind, in reality you also live outside yourself in the field of awareness. The 
Vedic seers say, "The real you cannot be squeezed into the volume of a body or the span of a 
lifetime." Just as reality flows from the virtual to the quantum to the material level, so do you. 
Whether we call this reincarnation or not almost doesn't matter. The package of body and 
mind that came before is a stranger to you now, and the one that might arise after your death 
is equally alien. But on a deeper level, millions of seeds have already been planted. Some are 
the thoughts you will have tomorrow or the actions you will follow a decade from now. Time 
is flexible at the quantum level and nonexistent at the virtual level. As we watch these seeds 
sprouting in the fertile field of time and space, awareness wakes up to itself. This is how a 
single fertilized cell learns to become a brain — it wakes up to itself, not on the chemical level 
but on the level of awareness. 

Perhaps you are a single cell among millions too, each cell being a lifetime. It was said that 
the Buddha closed his eyes for a few minutes and experienced ninety-nine thousand 
incarnations. If this is not breathtaking enough, we are told that he experienced every minute 
of them; births, deaths, and time itself expanded in a few minutes of silence. Such an amazing 
ability to control time lies not only with the enlightened. If you weren't a master of time 
already, you would be an amorphous glob of cells like the sea cucumber; you might have 
entered a world where puberty could come at any moment and kidney cells could fuse into 
spleens, or where the first pollen of hay fever season might kill half the population. 

Now imagine that expanded awareness is normal. Time and space could just be convenient 
concepts that hold true in the material world but dissolve gradually as you approach the 
quantum level. This is what I believe reincarnation is about. Former lives fall into the 
unexplored territory of expanded awareness. It isn't absolutely necessary to decide whether 
they are "real" or not. Concrete verification that I was a Nepalese soldier at the time of the 
Emperor Ashoka is never going to come my way. But if I find myself extremely attracted to 
that period, if I start to read about Ashoka and his conversion to Buddhism, and if my 
empathy is so strong that I cannot help but adopt some of those principles, we can truthfully 
say that a wider range of life has influenced my mind. In a very real sense, the terms former 
life and expanded life are the same thing. 

All of the quantum and virtual levels are open to us all the time. To navigate them 
completely is impossible; they open up to us according to our own needs and abilities. But no 
part is intentionally closed off. Although we normally look no deeper than the personal 
domain, to look deeper is always possible. It is more normal to learn from the past than not to, 
and people who shut out their former lives — if we want to use that terminology — are shutting 
out lessons that give this present lifetime its purpose and meaning. For someone who has 



absorbed these lessons fully, there is no need to go beyond this lifetime, and yet such 
visitations are still part of the natural order of things. 

Finally, the fact that we are not confined to our physical body and mind gives us reason to 
believe in the existence of a cosmic intelligence that permeates life — and brings us close to 
the mind of God. But since we are talking about a quantum phenomenon, it isn't correct to say 
that God has been found, the way you would find a lost book where you forgot to look for it. 
A woman who had read some of my earlier writings on quantum reality had become excited 
and then went enthusiastically to her minister. He listened somewhat grimly while she poured 
out her bubbling happiness over these new spiritual ideas. When she was finished, he said 
curtly, "Call this man up and ask him if God is inside all of us." 

Obediently she tracked down my number and called. In a hesitant voice she asked the 
question, and I said, "Yes, according to the quantum model, God is inside all of us." 

She couldn't disguise her disappointment. "Oh dear, that's exactly what my minister said 
you would say." And then she hung up, crestfallen that the acceptable God, the one who looks 
over us from heaven, had been undermined. Only afterward did I realize that I had been 
carelessly trapped, for my answer wasn't right. In the quantum model there is no inside or 
outside. God is no more in us than he is anywhere else — he is simply not locatable. To say 
that we go within to meditate, to pray, or to find God is really just a convention. The timeless 
place where God exists can't be reduced to an address. Our exploration into former lifetimes 
indicates that the same may be true of us as well. 


TELEPATHY AND ESP 


The ability to know what another person is thinking, whether you call it mind reading or 
extrasensory perception, also occupies a shadowy middle ground between popular belief and 
science. In the laboratory, psychologists have discovered that some individuals are much 
more skillful at this than others. Subject A, when placed in a separate room staring at a series 
of picture cards, can sometimes transmit these mental images with surprising accuracy to 
another room where subject B is trying to receive them. Yet science has more or less stopped 
there. Various underground experiments were conducted by defense agencies during the Cold 
War to see if spies might be able to send messages or images by telepathy to a cohort across 
the Iron Curtain, but these attempts were never reliable. On the other hand, they were not 
complete failures, either. 

ESP has hindered investigation because it isn't clear that there really is a sender and a 
receiver. The blurring of two minds or the sharing of one thought is just as likely an 
explanation. We spoke about the fuzzy boundaries of time and space, and the boundary of 
personality is just as fuzzy. Are you really separate from me, or is this a convenient illusion 
we maintain so that life can proceed in a certain predictable way? 

Old married couples often seem to merge in both personality and thought. Twins can have 
uncanny similarities in the way their lives unfold. Extensive studies of identical twins, 
however, show that no stereotype covers all cases. At one extreme, a pair of identical twins 
can be so completely merged that they never live apart and, when questioned, speak with one 
voice and apparently think with one mind. In the unfortunate instance that one twin dies 
prematurely, the other mourns for life. At the other end of the spectrum, a pair of identical 
twins can be almost total strangers, sharing no experiences or thoughts. Many studies have 
been conducted of twins separated at birth and raised apart by totally different sets of parents. 
Generally in these cases the twins still exhibit about a 50 percent strong resemblance in 
behavior and thought patterns. When reunited, they also can form strong bonds, and then it is 



likely that some kind of mental sharing, whether it is ESP or not, will take place. Even when 
the empathy is intense, though, the twins do not divide into a sender of thought and a receiver. 

What this implies is that in the mind field, any boundary can be tenuous. If necessary, your 
mind can merge and communicate with another mind. A thought that, properly speaking, 
should belong to one of you becomes a joint experience. Why would such a merging be 
necessary? No one can really answer that precisely — in general, momentous events will act as 
a trigger, causing a spouse to intuit her dying partner's last wishes or one twin to know that his 
brother had suddenly been struck by lightning. The twin to whom this actually happened felt 
the shock of the lightning passing through his own body at the instant his sibling was killed. 
(To further underline the point in a bizarre way, after writing this example down, I met a 
lawyer who was pulled from an afternoon meeting by a wrenching pain in his abdomen. He 
had never had such an experience and departed home immediately. When he got there the 
police were waiting with tragic news. His mother had been stabbed and killed by an act of 
random violence at exactly the moment he had felt the pain. By what mysterious stroke of 
synchronous timing were mother, son, and murderer tied in a karmic dance?) 

But some ESP is totally trivial and inconsequential, too, as when we phone someone and 
hear, "I was just thinking about you." The real fascination lies deeper. We all assume that we 
are the authors of our thoughts. They don't simply appear as messages in our heads; we 
actively think them. But ESP tends to contradict this assumption. If two people vividly share 
the same thought, it may be that neither one is the author; there is simply the simultaneous 
reception of an idea. We can cite instances where two philosophers or scientists had the 
identical inspiration without knowing each other. The simultaneous invention of the calculus 
by Leibniz and Newton is one famous example. 

In Hollywood identical story lines arrive in clusters, so that millions wind up being spent 
on competing asteroid collision plots or volcano epics. The U.S. Patent Office gets 
bombarded by nearly identical inventions. We often say that an idea is "in the air," and this 
may be literally true, in that the unmanifest may unfold certain insights or revelations on a 
broad scale. This is particularly true on the collective level, where an entire society may be 
gripped with enthusiasm for revolution or social change. There doesn't have to be a sender or 
receiver in these cases, even though a prominent speaker of the new thought usually appears. 
We just say that a society is ripe for change when in fact a much more subtle process — the 
attunement of millions of individuals to a collective mind field — is taking place. 

In a fascinating experiment, mothers who breast-fed their infants were separated from 
them and given no information about their babies' activities. Even though miles away, many 
mothers started to lactate at exactly the same moment that their babies began crying and 
demanding milk. Two intimately connected minds can be united at the level of awareness. 

You may have cried out for help or solace from someone miles away, and sometimes they 
respond by showing up or calling. In wartime it is not uncommon for parents to know with 
certainty the exact moment that a son is killed on the battlefield. 

Awareness doesn't have to be human; it seems to pervade all lifeforms. In a forest where 
trees are being heavily foraged by animals, individual trees can protect themselves with a 
chemical defense. They start to exude indigestible tars into their leaves before they are even 
touched — having been warned by neighboring trees via chemical signals in the air or through 
their roots. In a similar act of communal awareness, the cells of a sea cucumber are arranged 
to give a mouth and digestive tract to this primitive animal, which is little more than a giant 
feeding tube. You can puree a sea cucumber in a blender, pour the solution of brine and cells 
into a bucket, and after a while the entire animal will regroup itself from the unformed 
biological sludge. 

These are all examples of awareness as a field beyond the body. These examples help us to 
shift away from a strictly private, isolated mind to a universal, shared mind whose body is the 



universe. Isolation is a material fact but not a quantum fact. The boundaries dividing "me" and 
"you" are much thinner than we realize. There is reason to believe that personal identity is just 
another convenience, useful for everyday living but ultimately too flimsy to be taken as real. I 
believe this is implied in the scriptural phrases "children of God" and "created in his image." 
Insofar as we are children of our parents, personality is simply continuing itself. One 
generation teaches the next how to obey the rules of limited identity. But in a multilayered 
reality, there has to be another father/mother for our extended identity, and this is the role we 
assign to God. We have not yet proved that there is such a divine parent, but it seems 
undeniable that our cosmic identity is real. 


ALTER EGOS (MULTIPLE 
PERSONALITY SYNDROME) 


In spiritual literature the body is sometimes called the vehicle of the soul, which is another 
way of saying that the invisible part dresses itself in visible clothing. Actually, the body is just 
as spiritual as the soul; both are expressions of the same awareness. As it unfolds into 
manifestation, the field of mind has to assume form, and form isn't simple — it takes thousands 
of processes to organize a single amoeba, much less a human body. Therefore, the flow of 
intelligence must obey laws that are set in place at the deepest level. 

Where one law ends, another begins, and between them a boundaiy is set as a division. For 
example, a skin cell in the middle level of the epidermis lives its life, dividing, breathing, and 
feeding, but as it is pushed closer to the surface, it begins to harden gradually, and by the time 
it arrives in contact with the air, its exterior is toughened enough to withstand contact with the 
environment. However, in this process the cell also dies, to be sloughed off and make way for 
the next generation of epidermal cells. 

The same proteins that will lead to the end of a cell's life serve to protect the body as a 
whole. How did the body learn this sacrificial act of altruism? When white cells become 
engorged with invading bacteria, they die in that service as well. An overarching awareness 
realizes what is good for the whole and can therefore sacrifice a small part. 

One law never applies to all; even life and death are apportioned out in small, precise 
steps. Every cell in your body, as it evolved in the embiyo, obeyed a host of different rules as 
it matured. The original fertilized ovum split into some cells in the stomach that survive only 
a few days, while others in the brain may last a lifetime. The same DNA that willingly 
destroys itself in a skin cell fights for survival in a sperm cell, whose frantic rush to fertilize 
an egg has been evident as long as plants and animals have existed. 

Now we are faced with a paradox, for awareness seems to be capable of infinite 
organization. It is both inside us and outside; it fights to live and yet rushes to die; it organizes 
itself into an incredibly complex whole yet is subdivided into almost infinite tiny 
compartments. This organization becomes noticeable mostly when it breaks down, such as 
when the laws that govern cell division, or mitosis, become deranged and a cancer cell wildly 
divides without limit. In this case the cell is acting for its own survival, feeling that it must 
reproduce at maximum rate, much as locusts breed out of control into plagues. Ultimately a 
plague dies out because it exceeds the amount of food available, and a cancer cell ultimately 
dies because it kills the host body. This outcome is obvious and would be communicated to 
the cancer cell if it were in contact with the body's basic intelligence, yet somehow this 
natural connection has been broken. 

In psychological terms, a similar thing happens with alter egos or its clinical extreme, 
multiple personality syndrome. Alter egos are formed under psychological pressure. The 



stress that one personality cannot contain spills over into another. If I feel unfairly treated at 
work, I may have a dream in which I am a lion tamer whipping a big cat to do my will, and 
these may be symbols of the stress I'm not able to handle when I'm awake. The dream's 
interpretation may not be open to me, so I may not be aware that the lion is my boss or that 
my fear of him is being acted out here. 

The person suffering from multiple personalities is in much the same situation, but the lion 
tamer exists in waking state. The negative energies of hatred, fear, child abuse, self-doubt, 
humiliation, and so forth get played out as if they belonged to someone else. These other 
personalities are trapped within one body, but they are separate enough to pretend that they 
aren't. 

At the unmanifest level, each of us is many people; you can define this in terms of 
lifetimes, but that isn't necessary. When you read a novel with a fascinating character in it, 
you subtly blend into that figure, allowing a boundaiy of awareness to melt temporarily so 
that you can have the experience of being inside someone else's skin. If you come from a 
family where certain striking events are discussed for years, it becomes hard to remember 
whether these strong memories really belong to you or were piped into your mind. I know a 
man whose parents lost their home to fire when he was two years old, and he cannot recall if 
he saw the house bum down or sees it only with secondhand vividness. Emotionally he feels 
the same trauma as if he had been there, but he could have absorbed his parents' emotions of 
shock and loss. 

Normally our alter egos are shadowy, and the ability to rejoin our "real" personality is 
overtly ours to control. We know that we aren't Scarlett O'Hara or Ebenezer Scrooge, yet we 
allow the willing suspension of disbelief to take over for a brief hour or so. Some characters 
are so overpowering that you may fall under their influence for a much longer time. Neurosis 
is often marked by this kind of long-range influence, where an inner child with all its 
weakness and fearfulness continues to preside inside an adult personality. 

If your boundaries are too thin, however, you cannot control this act of becoming another 
character. The extreme state of this is alter egos. 

From the perspective of the mind field, if an alter ego is strong enough, it can actually 
change the body to conform to it. Striking cases are on record in which one personality is 
menopausal, for example, while the others aren't, or where each of the alter egos has its own 
menstrual cycle. In other cases a single personality may be diabetic or allergic to pollen while 
the others show no signs of these disorders. The patient can be in the throes of a severe 
asthma attack when a new personality enters the scene, and at that instant all evidence of 
asthma will disappear. The diabetic personality may be insulin dependent and yet revert to 
normal blood sugar levels during the times when other personalities appear. 

This phenomenon, as I see it, cannot be explained as brain function. The brain adapts itself 
in our childhood, so that what we know, what we have experienced, what we like and dislike 
are all formative. A person who violently dislikes insects will jump at the sight of a spider 
without having to think consciously about it. To claim that the brain could form different 
reactions for a dozen personalities is not credible; it would defy everything we know about 
childhood development. Alter egos must come from a region beyond personal experience; 
they are like voluntary incarnations — or partial incarnations — activated from the storehouse 
of the mind field. 

This alone doesn't make an alter ego unnatural. A great actor also activates his portrayal of 
Hamlet by going to the unmanifest. We say that he is bringing his character to life, as opposed 
to lesser actors who only imitate. The school of acting known as Method consists of going 
inward and finding emotional memories powerful enough to convince the audience that they 
are real, that one is actually feeling Hamlet's guilt on stage before our eyes. Someone afflicted 
with alter egos is like a master of Method who doesn't realize that he is acting. He has no 



fixed core, no central perspective that is not acting; he therefore can't see that the illusion is an 
illusion. 

"Why do you insist that my normal self is unreal?" a disciple once complained to his 
master. 

"Why not put it the other way?" the master replied. "What makes you think you are real?" 

"It's obvious," said the disciple. "I think and feel and act. I know myself for who I am, with 
all my habits, my likes and dislikes." 

"Yes, but what do you really know?" the master insisted. "Did you have your habits when 
you were asleep?" 

"Of course not. I am unconscious when I am asleep." 

"Perhaps you are unconscious now." 

"No, right now I am awake." 

"Really?" The master smiled. "Can you remember everything that happened to you 
yesterday? Or even what you were thinking an hour ago? Isn't your self-awareness very 
selective, amounting to just a partial memory? And then there are your dreams, which you 
lose as soon as you wake up. Not to mention that your habits and preferences are always 
changing, and even when you do seem stable, don't your emotions often betray you? An insult 
from a passing stranger can completely throw you off balance, or the news that someone close 
to you has died. Isn't there also the problem of being lost in wishes, false hopes, and various 
mental illusions?" 

The disciple looked baffled. "All this may be true, sir, but none of it makes me unreal. 
Perhaps I am just very confused." 

The master shook his head. "If so, then everyone is just as confused. The truth is that what 
we call a person is constantly in flux. There are long stretches of forgotten time, not to 
mention our lapse of consciousness when we sleep. Memory is faulty, and only the mind's 
craving for continuity keeps alive the illusion that 'I' is constant. 'I' is never constant. For 
every experience there is a different experiencer." 

"I am beginning to see what you mean," the disciple said with considerably more 
humbleness. "Although you make it seem that nothing can be trusted." 

"Nothing about the changing personality can be trusted," said the master. "But there is 
more to life than experience. Things come and go — feelings, events, achievements. Pleasure 
is inevitably followed by pain. Success is bound up with failure. Yet behind all this show of 
change, something remains aware at all times. Find out what that awareness is and you will 
have what can be trusted. This is the way out of illusion." 

In a society where we do not cultivate spiritual relationships, this kind of lesson is hard to 
learn. We continue to foster our alter egos, the many experiencers who are born with every 
experience. From the virtual perspective, however, our lives are therefore spent in illusion, 
because in reality we are not really limited by time and space, nor by this one body and mind. 
To discover our true nature involves a process of growth, and part of that growth is to deal 
with conflicts inside boundaries. If you have anxiety, you aren't supposed to shuffle it off onto 
another ego but deal with it within the limits of yourself. Multiple personality syndrome is 
therefore a strategy that works in the short run, because the separate egos usually have no idea 
of what the others are going through, but in the long run the person isn't anybody whole, just a 
collection of floating, disorganized fragments. 

Multiple personality doesn't have to be so disordered. We are all multiple personalities in 
that we switch from one role to another every day. I shift my identity among personas called 
father, son, brother, husband, professional. In fact, our inner dialogue is always based on the 
roles we are playing. If I think about a patient, the role of doctor becomes my internal 
reference point; if I think about my son, the internal reference point shifts automatically to 
father. This is not a disordered process; indeed people who cannot shift roles, who always 



have to be the authority or the boss, for example, even when that is not appropriate, suffer 
from an inability to express their multiple personalities. 

But the real "I" is neither doctor nor father nor any of my roles. "I” exists beyond and then 
manifests as father or doctor or son with the flicker of intention. To be grounded in this "I" is 
to be an alert witness to the roles we assume. This alert witness, because it exists in the virtual 
realm, approaches the mind of God. It may even be a part of God, for we assign to God the 
role of cosmic witness, the creator who looks on his creation with an all-knowing gaze. We 
don't yet know what that gaze means. We haven't yet addressed the issue of whether God is 
judging us. But at least we have gone beyond the illusion of our ever-shifting ego, and any 
step closer to the witness is moving closer to the divine. 


SYNCHRONICITY 


Time is not neutral. We say that it flows, and flow implies a direction, as well as a place 
where the journey ends. To the human mind, time has always flowed toward us. We are the 
end point of all those billions of years of evolution. God laid out time for us, as he continues 
to lay out each person's life so that it has a purpose to its unfolding. Such at least was the old 
belief, but to hold that God, a timeless being, sits outside the universe and plans the ticktock 
of creation is no longer tenable. 

We assume instead that randomness rules. Science has offered chaos theory to demonstrate 
that disorder lies at the heart of nature. As we have already seen, every object can be reduced 
to a swirl of energy that has no more pattern than a swirl of tobacco smoke puffed into the air. 
The scientific worldview tells us that events are not organized by any kind of outside force. A 
coincidence says otherwise; it is like a momentary reprieve from chaos. When two strangers 
meet and discover by chance that they have the same name or phone number, when someone 
decides at the last minute not to board a jet that later crashes, or when any train of events 
takes place that is exactly what is needed to reach an outcome, it seems as though more than 
simple coincidence is at work. Jung invented the term synchronicity to cover these 
"meaningful coincidences," and the term has stuck even though it doesn't cast much light on 
the mystery. What outside force can organize time in such a way that two things meet, like the 
Titanic and the iceberg, with such a sense of fatefulness? 

My own life has been touched often by synchronicity, so much so that now I get on an 
airplane expecting the passenger in the next seat to be surprisingly important to me, either just 
the voice I need to hear to solve a problem or a missing link in a transaction that needs to 
come together. (One time a staff consultant called me on the cell phone with enthusiastic 
plans for manufacturing a new and healthier line of herbal teas. I was running late to a plane, 
so I couldn't talk, and the proposal at that moment seemed far-fetched and rather impractical. 
The flight attendant guided me into the last remaining seat on a totally booked flight, and as if 
by design, the stranger next to me was a wholesaler in herbal teas.) 

Therefore my thoughts on this matter are highly personal: I believe that all coincidences 
are messages from the unmanifest — they are like angels without wings, so to speak, sudden 
interruptions of superficial life by a deeper layer. On the scientific side, however, I also 
suspect that there are no coincidences at all. Synchronicity is built into us at the genetic level, 
but our conscious minds choose to ignore this fact. We do not admit that our lives are 
balanced on the knife-edge of time. 

In a way no one has satisfactorily explained, our DNA is both in time and outside it. It is in 
time because all bodily processes are subject to cycles and rhythms, yet DNA is much more 
isolated than other chemicals anywhere in the body. Like a queen bee in her chamber, your 



DNA remains insulated within the cell's nucleus, and 99 percent of your genetic material lies 
dormant or inactive until it needs to uncoil and divide to create a mirror image of itself. 
Inactive DNA is chemically inert, and here is where time becomes more ambiguous. How 
does an inert chemical decide to wake up, and when? 

For a child to lose her baby teeth and replace them with adult ones, DNA has to know a 
great deal about the passage of time. The same holds true for any process — the maturing of 
the immune system, learning to walk and talk, the long gestation of a fetus in the womb — that 
must take place on schedule. Death itself may be a genetic response coded into our cells with 
a hidden timetable, the theory being that our ancestors could not have afforded to live too 
long. A tribe of mostly young, child-bearing members would be able to fight and gather food 
better than one burdened by excessive numbers of old people. DNA could take care of that 
dilemma by programming its own decline and demise, as grass does with the first frost, 
guaranteeing the survival of the species at the cost of the individual. 

Such speculation, however fascinating, begs the main question. How does DNA have any 
sense of time? It lives in a purely chemical world, surrounded by molecules that float by. It is 
certainly true that every cell maintains incredibly complex sequencing of chemical 
reactions — the marvel is that a cell can breathe, feed itself, excrete wastes, divide, and heal 
while living on death row, since a sentence of death is hanging over each cell all the time. 

This sentence is imposed by the fact that a cell cannot store reserves of oxygen and nutrients. 
It depends entirely on what flows into it. Cells stand at the forefront of life, storing no more 
than three seconds' worth of food and air; they cannot wait on late deliveries; lapses in 
efficiency would be instantly fatal. 

Researchers can isolate those enzymes or peptides that carry the messages needed to 
trigger any given process in a cell, or to end it. This doesn't really tell us who decided to send 
the messages in the first place or how thousands of signals manage to stay so precisely 
coordinated. Ultimately, all messages are sent by DNA to itself. 

Looking outside our bodies, one can assume that DNA had to evolve in a random world. 
Even at this very moment the assault on your body from the environment remains 
unpredictable. Cosmic rays penetrate your cells randomly, a bombardment that can potentially 
damage your genes. Random cell mutations occur as the result of mischance or accident, and 
your DNA has no guarantee that food, water, and temperature will be predictable, not to 
mention the sudden inrush of new toxins and pollutants of every kind. 

Imagine ancestral strands of DNA trying to survive in conditions far worse, as a young 
Earth convulsed through extremes of hot and cold in an atmosphere electrically charged with 
storms and filled with methane gas. Somehow DNA not only survived conditions that would 
have killed us in a matter of days or hours, but it evolved in such a way that when this hostile 
environment changed to a more benign one, our genes were prepared for that as well. 

Except for the rotation of the planet and the change of seasons, DNA wasn't exposed to a 
world of precise timing. Yet one has to conclude that when DNA took the immense step of 
learning to reproduce itself, a mastery of time came along. As strange as it sounds, bits of 
nucleic acid learned to read a watch down to thousandths of a second, and no amount of 
trauma from the outside world has made a dent in that ability. DNA's mastery of time is 
woven into the texture of life itself. 

Having seen this, the leap into synchronicity is not far. We only need to add the subjective 
ingredient: time has been ordered to benefit me, not just for my genes. Have you ever been 
stuck on some problem and turned on the television, only to have the next words coming out 
of it suddenly offer you a solution? A friend of mine was stepping onto a bus one day, 
wondering if he should heed the advice of a certain spiritual teacher, when the man ahead of 
him in line turned around and without any prompting said, "Trust him." These messages come 
from a level of mind that knows life as a whole, and ultimately we would have to say that we 



are really communicating with ourselves — the whole is talking to its parts. Synchronicity 
steps outside the brain and works from a larger perspective. 

Eliminating mind from the equation won't work because the only alternative is chance. In 
the mid-1980s, a man in Canada won the national lottery two years in a row. Since we know 
how many tickets were sold, the odds against this happening by chance can be precisely 
computed, and the answer is trillions and trillions to one — the exact number was said to be 
greater than the known stars in the universe. One reason Jung invented a new word for these 
meaningful coincidences is that the normal rational way of explaining them turned out to be 
too unwieldy. If I sit next to a stranger on a plane who is looking for a certain book idea to 
publish and that happens to be the very idea I am working on, the explanation of statistical 
probability does not apply. 

Although not easy to calculate, the odds of most synchronous events are preposterous. 
Anytime two people meet and discover that they have the same name or phone number, the 
odds are millions to one against their encounter. Yet this occasionally happens, and the simple 
explanation — that they were meant to meet — makes more sense than random numbers, but it 
isn't scientific. In spiritual reality, however, literally everything happens because it is meant 
to. The world is a meaningful place; everyone is working out their own lives' purpose. At 
synchronous moments, you get a peek at just how connected your life is, how completely 
woven into the infinite tapestry of existence. 

In the future, as spirit is given more credibility, I think the term synchronicity will become 
outmoded; our descendants will take for granted that all events are organized into patterns. 
Like our DNA, we have always flowed with the river of time and sat on the banks observing it 
simultaneously. It is only outside time that we can view our own deepest intelligence, because 
in the thick of things, time captures our attention and pulls us into its web. When we consider 
that we might be weaving the web, but from another level of reality, the possibility opens that 
God is sharing this task with us. We are building the argument that every aspect of creation 
requires us to be a co-creator, and this notion makes intimacy with God more and more likely. 


CLAIRVOYANCE AND PROPHECY 


The quantum world is a place of blurry edges and uncertain outcomes. As we have seen, the 
things that seem so well defined in the material world turn into shadowy phantoms the deeper 
we go into the unmanifest domain. Time is no exception, and at a certain level of reality it 
hardly exists. When the boundary of time dissolves completely, it is possible to experience a 
kind of mental time travel called clairvoyance, or the ability to see into the future. 

The brain cannot construct the clairvoyant state, as far as we know, since its visual centers 
are preoccupied with present sensations. Dreams are a kind of false vision, in that they are not 
really happening before our eyes yet appear to be. The clairvoyant is also experiencing an 
"unreal" visual state, yet the inner vision happens to come true. How, then, can a purely 
internal firing of neurons match events that have not come to pass? 

In my experience those who consider themselves clairvoyant are not all gifted with the 
same abilities. Inner vision can be clear or blurred; it can come and go, which makes it often 
unreliable; and its accuracy is always open to question, since no one knows to what extent the 
future is predetermined or open to change. A young friend of mine fell in love with a woman 
who, though fond of him, did not return his strong feelings. He became convinced, however, 
that she was his soul mate. He despaired of ever turning her feelings around and went to a 
psychic to find out if his soul-mate theory was true. The psychic came up with a startling 
number of accurate details. She assured him that she saw a woman named Tara with long 



brown hair who was going to art school. She further saw that the two of them would soon be 
living together; Tara's feelings would change, and as she recognized their deep spiritual bond 
it would become possible for the two to marry. This future vision, which included two 
children and a move to Los Angeles, delighted my friend, because it precisely fit his own 
vision of what the future should be. 

And that was the problem. Even though the psychic had tuned in to something deep in my 
friend's awareness, the pictures in her vision didn't come true. Far from being reassured, Tara 
was made very uncomfortable by the revelation that she was destined to wed a man whom she 
considered no more than a good friend. She withdrew from him, eventually finding her own 
boyfriend and moving in with him during summer vacation. The connection of two soul mates 
was never realized. 

Yet I know of other clairvoyants who do not seem to be misled by the hopes of their 
clients. They seem able to divide the wishful image from the actual event that will transpire, 
giving accurate images of a future mate or the outcome of a lawsuit, down to the exact timing 
of a judge's rulings. This accuracy gives serious pause, because as much as we might want to 
know the future, a preordained outcome renders all our striving insignificant. (To a skeptic 
who discredits clairvoyance, the problem is moot, naturally.) 

What would make us believe that clairvoyance is genuine? How is it different from other 
subjective illusions like dreams and hallucinations? For one thing, dreams typically contain 
material that was already present inside the person's memory. The symbols of a dream may be 
mysterious at first glance, but since dreams are wholly drawn from past experience, like old 
wine in new bottles, they are subject to interpretation. A clairvoyant, however, sees something 
new. But dreams and clairvoyance do have one strong link: they seem to depend on a person's 
belief or the belief system of a whole society. 

This implies that there is more than one way for the future to flow into the present. It can 
send messages ahead or keep itself completely veiled; it can choose those who will see and 
those who will be blind. Much more than we realize, our own awareness may be creating the 
boundaries of past, present, and future. In other words, we may be choosing not to be 
clairvoyant so that our belief in a hidden future is confirmed. When Cassandra foresaw the 
fall of Troy in the Iliad, her vision might have been believed, since the belief system of the 
ancient world included clairvoyant knowledge. (As it happened, the gods had cursed her 
always to be right and yet never to be believed; we call such a person a Cassandra to this day.) 

In quantum terms, one cannot be certain about the line between hallucinations and reality. 
There are no definite events, no river of time that flows from past to present to future. What 
exists in its place is a rich matrix of possible outcomes. There are infinite choices within every 
event, and we determine which select few are going to manifest. At the depths of the mind 
field, where all things exist in seed form as virtual events, it hardly matters which ones 
eventually sprout. They are no more real than the seeds that didn't. 

The most famous expression of this concept is the paradox of Schrddinger's cat, named 
after one of the founders of quantum physics. Schrodinger was trying to imagine how matter 
behaves when it begins to disappear into energy. He imagined a clever and rather sadistic 
mechanism, a box that holds a cat inside, hidden from view. A trigger in the box will release a 
poison to kill the cat if it is hit by a single electron. An electron is shot at the box in such a 
way that it can only go through two slits — if it takes a path through the left slit, the cat will 
survive; through the right, the cat will be killed. But since this is the quantum world, things 
are not well defined, and there is no way to tell which slit the electron chooses. Until the 
observer looks, the electron has chosen both slits equally. 

In this paradox the observer will know what path the electron took only by opening the box 
and seeing if the cat is alive or dead. Until that moment, both choices are valid, which 
means — and here is the startling part — that the cat is alive and dead at the same time. Opening 



the box determines its fate, because it takes an observer to cause the electron to have a defined 
place in space and time. Without the observer’s act, there is no defined outcome. 

For decades the paradox of Schrodinger's cat has been taken to be a clever mental trick, 
since physicists do not believe that quantum uncertainty exists beyond the level of electrons 
and photons. But the clairvoyant seems to indicate otherwise. In his vision, the future has two 
locations — here and later. He can choose which one to participate in simply by using the same 
power of observation that the physicist uses with an electron. 

Those of us who accept a simpler world, in which the future has only one location — 
later — are showing a personal preference; we are not obeying an iron law. The usefulness of 
time is that it keeps all the seeds of future events from sprouting at once. Time dictates that 
first one thing happens and then the next, without overlap. You cannot be a child and an adult 
simultaneously — except through clairvoyance. Then the leaking of one event into the next is 
allowed. All of us have had "gut feelings" that tell us when some situation will not turn out 
well. In these instances we have called upon a diluted form of clairvoyance that affords a clue 
to what will happen next. 

Is clairvoyance useful or not? Should one try to develop it or ignore it out of respect for the 
boundaries of time? Here no fixed answer can be given. Our DNA has to be clairvoyant; we 
could not survive if our genes did not know the future; the unfolding of an embryo in the 
womb, as it evolves from a single cell to billions, requires that DNA precisely foresees when 
neurons, heart cells, muscle tissue, and every other specialized mutation needs to develop. If 
neurons grew on the wrong day, the day when fingers needed to emerge, for example, havoc 
would result. So that first fertilized ovum contains a map of the future imprinted in invisible 
ink. 

Other situations are not so clear. In general, the highest purpose of clairvoyance may be to 
give us a glimpse into the mind of God, because a divine mind could not be constrained by 
time and does not recognize past, present, or future. If you decide to soften the boundary of 
time, you must take responsibility for all that comes with such a decision. Science fiction is 
rife with stories of reckless time travelers who found disaster when they broke into the future 
or the past. At the very least, one runs the risk of getting present time and vision time 
hopelessly confused. The spiritual masters keep teaching us that living in the present moment 
is the ideal, if only we can reach it. The Jewish philosopher Philo, who was a follower of 
Plato, writes: "’Today' means boundless and inexhaustible eternity. Periods of months and 
years and of time in general are ideas of man, who calculates by number; but the true name of 
eternity is Today." This is the ultimate mystery of clairvoyance — any moment, whether now 
or later, is a doorway into the same eternity. 

I believe that prophets live in this expanded space as well, and although we tend to fixate 
on their ability to foresee events, their truly spiritual function is to see beyond time. An ability 
to transcend time isn't mystical; every culture has specific beliefs about this. In India, 
prophecy has been organized into a detailed system of astrology called Jyotish (the name is 
rooted in the Sanskrit word jyoti, which means "light"). Prediction of the future literally 
means examining what the light has to say, and the ultimate astrologer is a visionary who 
bypasses all charts to peer directly into the light of the future. 

We can begin to understand how this works only by our knowledge of quantum reality, for 
there all light is born. Time and space are interchangeable at the quantum level. Where a 
particle will be and when it will be there are bound up together. In this way energy is not 
separate from space-time. They form one tapestry. The astrologer goes a step further. He 
breaks the entire cosmos down into specific kinds of energy as they apply to human existence. 
In Jyotish certain planets are generally beneficial in their energies (such as Jupiter and 
Venus), while others are generally harmful (such as Mars and the Sun). 



As these energies interact, enormously complex patterns emerge. Jyotish can generate 
sixteen separate charts for each person, involving the most minute motions of planets; time 
can be subdivided into fractions of a second to arrive at specific predictions about a person's 
future. And since each degree of change in the heavenly bodies creates a new frequency of 
energy, the astrologer must memorize several thousand individual patterns between any two 
or three planets — these arrangements are called yogas, literally the "yoking" of stars. 

To its proponents Jyotish is a quantum science, because what is seen on the material 
level — the rotation of planets in their orbits — disguises a deeper scheme. In the deeper 
scheme, every atom and molecule is connected. By exchanging energy, each point in the 
universe is whispering to every other point. In this case, however, energy contains 
information. Imagine a line of people passing a secret by whispering it from person to person 
down the line. If each person whispered gibberish, there would be no information being 
passed along, only raw energy. But if there is a secret being spoken, the same energy becomes 
meaningful. It binds the group together through shared knowledge, and this invisible bond, 
even when unspoken, can be extremely powerful. Jyotish considers the universe to be secretly 
bound in Just this way; every exchange of energy contains some clue to future events. 

The concept of information embedded in energy isn’t totally alien outside astrology. To a 
physicist information is pervasive throughout nature. The specific frequencies that make 
infrared light different from ultraviolet, or gamma rays different from radio waves, all form a 
kind of cosmic code. Human beings tune in to this code and use it for our own purposes — it is 
the information embedded in energy that allows us to build electrical generators, infrared 
lamps, radio beacons, and so forth. Without that coded information, the universe would be a 
random vibration, a quantum soup of alphabet letters but no words. 

Jyotish asserts that the information coded into energy has human significance. In other 
words, the future is spelled out in light. Photons actually speak to the astrologer, forming 
exact patterns that will emerge eventually as events in time. An ancient master of astrology 
named Brighu gave startling proof of this. Thousands of years ago he sat down to write charts 
that would predict the lives of people in the future, those not yet born. But even more 
amazing, he set down only the charts of people who would actually show up in the future to 
get a reading. If I were to go to Benares and visit a Brighu reader, as one is called, the test of 
his authenticity would be that my chart would be waiting for me, detailed down to the minute 
that I crossed the doorstep. 

Boundaries are all made in consciousness and dissolved in consciousness. To be able to 
cross the boundary of time or to speak the language of light tells us that even our most basic 
assumptions are open to choice. Awareness is all. The present moment is so valued by 
spiritual masters because it is the place where awareness can be focused. The past and the 
future are distractions, pulling us into an abstract mental state that will never be alive. You 
cannot dive deep into an illusion, but it may turn out, once awareness is willing to expand, 
that you can dive infinitely into this moment. The present has been called "the eternal now" 
because it refreshes itself without end. With this realization, the door to wisdom is opened, 
despite all our current fears that wisdom has withered or is somehow a thing of the past. The 
past is actually the enemy of wisdom. Any kind of linear thinking is doomed to remain 
trapped on the surface of life. But if we experience our minds as multidimensional, we get 
closer to God's mind, which is all-dimensional. 



Six 


CONTACTING GOD 


Ask, and it will be given to yon; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you. 

—MATTHEW 7:7 


Knowing God would be impossible if he didn't want to be known. There is nothing to prevent 
every stage of spirituality from being a delusion. The saint who speaks to God may be 
suffering from a lesion of the right temporal lobe. On the other hand, a convinced atheist may 
be shutting out messages from God every day. 

Our quantum model tells us three ways that God is already contacting us: 

1 . He exists at a level of reality beyond the five senses that is the source of our being. 
Since we are quantum creatures, we participate in God all the time without 
acknowledging it. 

2. He is sending us messages or clues into the physical world. We've called this the flow 
of reality. 

3. He is attracting notice through "second attention," the deepest intuitive part of our 
brains, which most people ignore. 

These three ways to know God are based on the facts accumulated in our search so far. 
We've built the plane and we know the theory of flight — what remains is to take off. 

God seems to be sending us messages from outside time and space. Some of these spiritual 
clues are faint, but some are very dramatic. One of the most recent healings at Lourdes 
happened to a young Irishman afflicted with multiple sclerosis. He arrived late at the shrine, 
after the holy waters were closed to the public for the day. His only access to Lourdes was to 
wait outside the walls and listen to the vesper services before sunset. 

Disappointed, he was taken back to his hotel in a wheelchair. Sitting alone in his room, he 
suddenly felt a change. His body grew warm and as he lay down on the bed, a bolt of light 
shot up his spine, causing him to writhe from its intensity; he lost consciousness. But when he 
awoke, he could walk, and all signs of his MS had vanished. He returned home healed. I think 
there is no doubt, given the thousands of people who have had such experiences, that this is 
the "light of God," revered in every sacred tradition. The light fascinates us because God 
enters our world in few other ways that are as tangible. 

In research polls, up to half of Americans say that they have experienced some form of 
light that they couldn't explain, either internally or as an external aura or halo. About a third 
of Americans say that they are "bom again," which we can interpret as a spiritual awakening 
of some kind. One of the most famous of modern Indian saints was Sri Aurobindo, a Bengali 
who attended Cambridge around the turn of the century before entering the holy life back in 
India. Aurobindo's own awakening began the instant he set foot on native soil, when an 
almost electric shock awakened him to the truth of higher consciousness. He later speculated 



that all human beings are on the road to enlightenment via a process of mental evolution. (The 
late Jonas Salk devoted many years to a similar theory that human beings were about to make 
the transition from biological evolution, which perfected our physical structure, to 
"metabiological" evolution, which would perfect our spirit.) 

A form of "supra-consciousness," as Aurobindo termed it, is gradually descending upon 
us, beginning with the higher centers of awareness, those that cause us to intuit God's 
existence, then making its way down until our very cells are transformed. According to 
Aurobindo, God can send "arrows of light" into our world, but these go in only one direction. 
We can receive them as impulses of inspiration, yet our thoughts cannot retrace their path. 

To get back to the source of God's messages, we would have to use second attention, our 
ability to know something without any physical information. Intuition and prophecy involve 
second attention. So does the saint's insight into God and the controlled experiment in which 
people know that they are being watched from another room. Jesus speaks about his Father as 
if possessing intimate knowledge, and this too derives from second attention at its most 
developed level. Significantly, when we hear the sayings of Jesus, such as "Know the truth 
and the truth shall set you free," our minds respond. It is as if second attention in us is sleepy 
but willing to wake up. This accounts for much of the fascination that all sages and seers hold 
for ordinary people. 

For the moment I am going to set aside the conventional ways to find God, such as prayer, 
contemplation, faith, good works, and virtue. This isn't to discount them, but certain stark 
facts have to be recognized. Many believers use all these means to know God and come up 
empty-handed. When they seem to work, they are inconsistent — some prayers are answered 
while others go completely unheeded, faith can work miracles but sometimes it can't. Most 
important, the conventional paths to God have not abolished atheism. However powerful a 
subjective experience may be, since it cannot be shared, person A is outside the inner world of 
person B. The process is shut in a private, self-enclosed cocoon. 

Before describing how second attention — the key to picking up the spiritual messages sent 
by God — can be developed, we have to rid ourselves of self-delusion. Stripped down to its 
essentials, by seeking to know God we run into the same problem we do when we seek to 
know what lies outside the universe. It is the problem of defining objective reality. By 
definition the universe contains everything, so the rational mind might assume that nothing 
lies outside it. The rational mind would be wrong. Theorists can construct perfectly plausible 
versions of other dimensions. In one model our universe is just a bubble on the outside of an 
expanding super-universe with ten or more dimensions that our senses can't perceive. Perhaps 
one of them is the home of angels? Reason can neither prove nor disprove the possibility, but 
it can get tantalizingly close. 

Without ever seeing into this other world, we can observe black holes and quasars, which 
are the nearest thing to windows on the edge of infinity. As light and energy get sucked into a 
black hole, they disappear from our cosmos. This implies that they are going somewhere; 
therefore they might also return to us via "white holes" or acts of creation like the Big Bang. 
God is not this knowable, however. There is no black hole that sucks you into his world, 
unless it is death. The great fascination of near-death experiences is that people return 
convinced that they have entered the divine presence, but the information they bring back is 
limited. Most report a white light that bathed them in love and peace, but a small minority say 
it burns with the torment of hell rather than the rapture of heaven and that the being who 
beckons at the end of the tunnel isn't benign but evil. Moreover, near-death experiences can 
be duplicated artificially through oxygen deprivation to the brain, as we mentioned before. In 
these cases the same white light often appears, so perhaps it is just an artifact of the cerebrum 
as it begins to suffocate. 



We need better proof that God wants to be found in his cosmic hiding place. Then the 
whole development of second attention will fall into place as the truest approach to the 
domain of spirit. 

To know God personally, you must penetrate a boundary that physicists call "the event 
horizon," a line that divides reality sharply in half. On this side lies anything that remains 
within the speed of light; on the other side is anything faster than the speed of light. Einstein 
was among the first theorists to propose that the speed of light is connected to space-time in a 
crucial way. The speed of light is absolute; it is like a wall that no object can crash through. 

As we approach the wall, time slows down, mass increases, and space becomes curved. If you 
try to crash through, weird things happen to prevent you from doing so. 

For example, any light that passes too near a black hole gets pulled into its field of gravity. 
Black holes are the remnants of old stars that collapsed onto themselves when they ran out of 
fuel. Aging stars are already too dense for us to imagine — a single teaspoon of matter inside 
one may be millions of times heavier than the whole earth. As this stellar fuel collapses it can 
get out of control, like a runaway train. In some instances the momentum is irreversible, and 
even light cannot escape from the star's force field. In that case there is only blackness — a 
black hole — that engulfs any passing object. If a photon of light tries to go around a black 
hole, it will start to curve in the hole's direction until it falls in. 

This is where Einstein's absolute wall meets its match. The photon is traveling as fast as 
anything can go, so it isn't possible for a black hole to make it go any faster. On the other 
hand, a photon has to go faster if it wants to escape the clutches of the black hole's immense 
gravity. At the exact meeting point where the photon and the black hole are equal, everything 
becomes weird. To an outside observer, the photon falls into the back hole forever, frozen in 
time. Inside the black hole, however, the photon has already been devoured, in less than a 
hundred microseconds. Both versions are true. One is seen from the world of light, the other 
from the world beyond light. To use Heisenberg's phrase, an "uncertainty principle" holds true 
at this level of nature — event A and event B both exist together, even though they are 
opposites. This borderline of uncertainty is the event horizon, the exact margin dividing 
reality in half between the certain and the uncertain, the known and the unknown. 

Any place where knowledge stops there is also an event horizon. The brain can't explore 
beyond where photons go. There is no perception without juggling photons around. If my cat 
or dog was staring right at God, it would do me no good because I don’t share their nervous 
systems. A nervous system is just a machine for sensing photons. Depending on what model 
you have, your pattern of photons is different from that produced by other models. The mind 
may cross the event horizon in theory, using intellectual speculation and advanced 
mathematics, but this is like Alice jumping down the rabbit hole. When Kierkegaard made his 
famous remark that God is known only through a leap of faith, he was referring to a spiritual 
rabbit hole. What lies beyond the event horizon? It could be a new universe with intelligent 
life in it; it could be a tea party of gods and goddesses; or it could be a chaos of squashed 
dimensions tumbling like twisted sheets in a dryer. 

Thus ends the whole search for God. Or does it? Strangely enough, lots of things lie 
beyond the event horizon that turn out to be useful. Quantum physics dips across the border 
all the time, only it can't stay there very long. When a particle accelerator bombards two 
atoms, causing a subatomic particle to jump out of its hiding place for a few millionths of a 
second, the event horizon has been crossed. Something that was unknowable by the five 
senses suddenly jumps into our world. Combining this with various "thought experiments," 
science inched its way toward nuclear power, transistors, and (if we look into the future) 
advanced computer memory and time travel. Already a beam of light has been made to move 
from one location to another in a Cal Tech laboratory without crossing the space in between, 



which is a form of primitive time travel. We are learning little by little to be at home across 
the event horizon. 

A skeptic may argue (quite fiercely) that I am distorting the event horizon beyond its literal 
meaning. If you throw a pebble into a black hole, it will seem to freeze in place forever, 
utterly defying physical laws of motion, but does that mean God is eternal? No — the event 
horizon is not accepted by science as the limit of mind. It is intriguing that the Buddha once 
shut his eyes for a moment and upon opening them declared that he had experienced ninety- 
nine thousand past incarnations, but this example of time travel could be imaginary. What we 
do know is that God can't be on this side of the event horizon. Since the Big Bang, light has 
been traveling for about ten to fifteen billion years. If a telescope is pointed in any direction, it 
cannot receive light older than that; therefore an entity farther away must remain invisible. 
This doesn't mean there is no existence beyond fifteen billion years. Strangely enough, certain 
faraway objects appear to be emitting radiation that is older than the universe, a fact 
cosmologists are unable to comprehend. If the human brain contains its own event horizon 
(the limit of photons to organize themselves as thought) and so does the cosmos, we must 
cross over to find the home of spirit. 


A MAP OF THE SOUL 


In the dead of night I was awakened by the sound of screaming. Groggy as I was, I knew it 
must be coming from somewhere in the house, and my heart was pounding before I could sit 
up. Then someone flicked on the light above my bed. 

"Come, get dressed, we have to leave," a half-familiar voice said. I didn't move. It took a 
moment before I had enough presence of mind to realize that it wasn’t a scream I had heard 
but a wail. 

"Come on," the voice repeated, this time more urgently. Strong arms picked me up and 
carried me out of the room. I was seven, and our neighbor in Bombay had come for me, but 
he didn't tell me why. Instead the warm dampness of tropical air caressed over my face until 
we reached his house, where I was put to bed again. 

This was the night my grandfather died. We called him Bauji, and he was famous for 
getting on the rooftop with his old military bugle, blasting the neighbors awake on the 
morning I was born. He died without warning at 3 A.M. The wailing came from the servants 
and women of the house. It was their way of beginning the long process that makes death 
acceptable, but that wasn't a help to me. I had a reaction common to young children; I refused 
to believe what had happened. Just that day my grandfather had been jubilant. His son, my 
father, had been admitted into the Royal College of Physicians in London, a rare achievement 
for a native-born Indian in those days just after World War II. The minute he got the telegram, 
Grandfather swept me and my younger brother into his old black sedan and rushed us to not 
one but two movies (a Jerry Lewis movie and then Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves). He had 
heaped so much candy and toys on us that my brother, Sanjiv, started to cry from sheer stress. 

Yet within a day my grandfather was a cloud of ashes thrown into the river at the holy city 
of Hardwar — I refused to accept that. How could he be gone, who hardly a day before was 
sitting next to me in the dark laughing at All Baba's antics? 

A new and painful act in the family drama then ensued. My parents, who had left us out of 
their care during my father's last phase of medical study, rushed back to India. There was 
lingering guilt that Grandfather had died of a heart attack, because ironically cardiology was 
my father's specialization. And my brother Sanjiv got very ill, suffering from a skin malady 
that seemed to have no origin except the shock of recent events. 



Now I understand that we were all worrying about my grandfather's soul. We wondered 
where it had gone; we worried if it had suffered; deep down we might have been wondering if 
such a thing as the soul even existed. Such questions, in one form or another, have been hard 
for me to escape. The soul is the carrier that takes us beyond; it is the essence connecting us to 
God. But what do these words really mean? 

In the ancient Vedas it says that the part of us that doesn't believe in death will never die. 
This simple definition of the soul is not a bad one. It accurately describes everyone's secret 
belief that death may be real for some but not for us. Psychologists are impatient with this 
feeling of personal immortality. They claim that we use it to defend ourselves against the 
inescapable fact that one day we will die. But what if the opposite is true? What if feeling 
immortal and beyond death is the most real thing about us? 

To prove this point one way or another, we need facts, just as we needed them about God. 
The soul is as mysterious as God, and we have just as few reliable facts about it. I would offer 
that the first fact about the soul is that it is not really as personal as people believe. The soul 
doesn't feel or move; it doesn't travel with you as you go about your life, nor does it endure 
birth, decay, and death. This is just a way of saying that the soul stands apart from ordinary 
experience. Since it also has no shape, getting a mental picture of the soul isn't possible. 

Instead, the soul is really a junction point between time and the timeless. (1) It faces in 
both directions. When I experience myself in the world, I am not experiencing my soul, yet it 
is somewhere on the periphery. There is no doubt that we sense its presence, however 
vaguely. But it would be a mistake to think that the soul and the person are the same. My 
grandfather was an old man with thinning hair, prone to enthusiasm and fierce in his love for 
us. I have powerful memories of him, yet all his qualities and all my memories have nothing 
to do with his soul. Those qualities died with him; his soul did not. So the soul is like a carrier 
of the essence, but what is that essence like? If I can't experience my soul as an emotion, if 
everything I know about myself since birth is separate from my soul, it must not be a material 
thing. 

In other words, the soul begins at the quantum level, which makes sense since the quantum 
level is also our doorway to God. To go through this door isn't something we choose; 
participation is mandatory. In India the soul has two parts. One is called Jiva, which 
corresponds to the individual soul making its long journey through many lifetimes until it 
reaches full realization of God. When a child is taught that being good means your soul will 
go to heaven, it is Jiva that we are talking about. Jiva is involved in action. It is affected by 
our good and bad acts; it rules our conscience, and all the seeds of karma are planted inside it. 
The kind of person you turn out to be is rooted in Jiva, and the kind of life you make for 
yourself will change Jiva day by day. 

The second half of the soul, called Atman, does not accompany us on any journey. It is 
pure spirit, made of the same essence as God. Atman cannot change in any way. It never 
reaches God because it never left in the first place. No matter how good or bad your life, your 
Atman remains constant; in fact, the worst criminal and the holiest saint have the same quality 
of soul when it is this aspect that is in question. There is no good approximation for Atman in 
the West, and many people might wonder why the soul has to be divided in this way. 

The answer lies at the virtual level, for we have seen that all the familiar qualities of life, 
such as time, space, energy, and matter, gradually fade into a shadowy existence until they 
disappear. But this disappearance leaves something intact — spirit itself. Jiva lives at the 
quantum level, Atman at the virtual. So the faintest, subtlest trace of "me" that can be detected 
at the quantum level is Jiva, and once it disappears, pure spirit remains — that is Atman. The 
distinction between them is absolutely necessary, for otherwise the path back to God would 
break down. 


You need Jiva to remember who you are personally. You need Atman to remember 
yourself as pure spirit. 

You need Jiva to have a reason to act, think, wish, and dream. You need Atman for 
the peace beyond all action. 

You need Jiva to journey through time and space. You need Atman to live in the 
timeless. 

You need Jiva to preserve personality and identity. You need Atman to become 
universal, beyond identity. 

As you can see, even though they are melded together as "soul," these two aspects are 
exact opposites in many ways. Such is the paradox of the soul that it manages to 
accommodate itself to our world of time, thought, and action while dwelling eternally in the 
spiritual world. The soul must be half-human, half-divine in order to give us a way to retain 
our identity during all the prayer, meditation, seeking, and other spiritual work that is 
involved in finding God, and yet the soul must have a divine aspect that embodies the goal of 
all seeking. 

On the material level I am not aware of my Atman. I walk and talk and think without any 
consciousness that my source lies much deeper. But at the soul level I am totally aware of 
who I am. The soul level is a very strange place, because it gives rise to all activity without 
being active itself. Think about that carefully. As I travel around from here to there, my soul 
doesn't move, because at the quantum level the field just ripples and vibrates — it doesn't 
change location from A to B. I am bom, grow old, and die — these events have tremendous 
significance for my body and mind. Yet at the quantum level nothing is bom, grows old, or 
dies. There is no such thing as an old photon. We can get some clues to this riddle from a 
common device, a television set. When you see a TV character walking from left to right on 
the screen, your brain registers a false impression. Nothing on that screen, not a single 
electron, has actually moved from left to right. With a magnifying glass you would see that 
the only activity taking place is the flickering of phosphors on the surface of the cathode-ray 
tube. If phosphor A is to the left of phosphor B, its flicker can be timed so that just as it goes 
off, phosphor B lights up. This trick makes it look as if something has moved from left to 
right, just as twinkling Christmas lights seem to circle around the tree. 

Now let's apply the same trick to ourselves. When I get out of my chair and walk across 
the room, my body seems to be moving, but in fact nothing of the sort is happening at the 
quantum level. Instead, a series of virtual particles is flickering in and out to create the 
illusion of motion. This is such an important point that I want to give several more examples. 
Go to the beach where ocean waves are crashing on the shore. If you wade out and put a cork 
on the water, your senses tell you that it will be carried along by the waves — but it isn't. The 
cork stays in place, bobbing up and down as the waves pass along. The water is also just 
moving up and down. It is the same water that hits the shore, not new water carried from 
miles away. The wave motion takes place only at the energy level, creating the illusion that 
the water is getting nearer to the shore. Now the examples get more mysterious: When two 
magnets are drawn to each other, what pulls them together is the magnetic field. But the field 
itself doesn't move. All over the world compass needles are wiggling, but the earth's magnetic 
poles aren't. How does a nonmoving field make a needle or two heavy pieces of iron move? 
Again it is an illusion — at the quantum level, virtual photons, acting as carriers of the 
magnetic force, flicker in and out, and because they do this in sequence, the appearance of 
motion is created. 

Let's assume that we can accept the fact that you and I are not moving, either. To a 
quantum physicist, our bodies are just objects, like any other. A ball thrown across the room 
isn't moving, only winking in and out of existence at an incredibly fast speed at different 



locations, and we are no different. But here the mystery deepens. When the ball disappears for 
a nanosecond, only to reappear just the tiniest bit to the left or right, why didn't it disintegrate? 
After all, it was completely absent for a while, and there is no reason why its old shape and 
size and color shouldn't simply dissolve. Quantum physics can even calculate the odds that it 
won't reappear, that instead of a ball flying across the room, a bowl of pink Jell-0 will 
suddenly appear. What keeps things together? 

If we go back to the television, the answer is obvious. The characters walking across the 
screen are just phantoms, but they are organized phantoms. Their image is fixed on film or 
videotape, their motions are planned and worked out. In other words, there is intelligence 
behind the illusion. This presiding intelligence keeps the random flickers of photons from 
being truly random; it creates forms from formless electrical charges. For it turns out that not 
just the motion of a TV image is illusion, so is its color and shape. So is its voice, if the 
character happens to speak. No matter what quality you look for, it can be broken down to 
pulses of energy, and these pulsations have meaning only because a hidden director has 
created it. 

This is essentially the argument for the soul. It holds reality together; it is my offscreen 
director, my presiding intelligence. I can think, talk, work, love, and dream, all because of the 
soul, yet the soul doesn't do any of these things. It is me, yet I would never recognize it if we 
came face-to-face. Everything that makes the difference between life and death must cross 
into this world via the soul. Today I sat down to see if I could list all the invisible events 
happening at the soul level, and the results inspire a deep awe at the "soul work" (which the 
medieval church called psychomachia) going on with every breath: 

Infinity is becoming finite. 

The unmoving is starting to move. 

The universe is shrinking to a location inside you. 

Eternity is taking on the appearance of time. 

Uncertainty is becoming certain. 

The undefined is becoming definite. 

That which has no cause is starting the chain of cause and effect. 

Transcendence is coming down to earth. 

The divine is taking on a body. 

Randomness is turning into patterns. 

The immortal is pretending to be born. 

Reality is putting on the mask of illusion. 

You share this soul work with God. He can be defined in infinite ways, but one version of 
God is that he is a process. The process involves bringing life into being. Science has its story 
about how life originated two billion years ago from a soup of organic chemicals. This soup, 
probably contained in the earth's ancient oceans, was struck by lightning and began to boil 
into primitive self-reproducing nucleic acids, from which the long chain of evolution 
proceeded. But from the spiritual viewpoint, life is being created all the time through the kind 
of soul work just listed. 

There is more to life than raw creation. The soul, as every religious tradition has insisted, 
exists to bring an end to suffering. The same cannot be said about any other aspect of 
ourselves. The mind, ego, and emotions cause as much pain as pleasure; they can throw us 
into turmoil and confusion despite all our efforts to reach clarity and peace. The soul has been 
assigned the unique function of working only for what is most evolutionary in each person's 
life. It couldn’t accomplish this end by turning the infinite into the finite, the timeless into 



time, and so forth — these processes have no human value until we add another ingredient, the 
dispelling of suffering. 

Someone who is attuned to the soul begins to perceive that a subtle guidance is at work. 
The soul is silent; therefore it cannot compete with the contentious voices heard in the mind. 
You can spend years overshadowed by anger, fear, greed, ambition, and all the other 
distractions of inner life, but none of that activity touches Atman. The soul has its own project 
in mind. The Vedas describe this project in terms of the five kleshas, or causes of human 
suffering. They are: 

1 . Ignorance about the nature of reality 

2. Identification with the ego 

3. Attraction toward objects of desire 

4. Repulsion from objects of desire 

5. Fear of death 

The great sages and seers who laid out this scheme of suffering all emphasize that all five 
causes boil down to one — the very first. When a person forgets that he has a soul, that his 
source is rooted in eternal Being, separation results, and from separation all other pain and 
suffering follows. 

But for these ancient formulations to have any usefulness today, we have to update them. I 
thi nk a modern restatement would go something like this: 

1 . A person thinks that only material existence is real and thus becomes totally ignorant 
of the source, which is quantum and virtual. He accepts the illusion of time and space. 
When this happens, contact with the source is lost. The voice of the soul begins to 
grow fainter and fainter. 

2. Drifting in separation, the person seeks desperately for something to cling to. Life 
cannot abide Being without a foundation; therefore the mind creates an entity known 
as the ego. This "I" is the same as the personality. It is constructed from all kinds of 
experiences, and as these become all-important, the "I" and its needs have to be 
defended at all costs. 

3. The ego has many needs, and so it begins to value the fulfillment of those needs. The 
whole world becomes a means to make the ego stronger, more important, and more 
secure. To that end, it pulls all kinds of objects toward itself: food, shelter, clothing, 
money, etc. 

4. For a time this strategy seems to work. Although it never becomes truly secure, the 
ego finds that life can be filled up by acquiring more and more. No one can gain 
complete control over the environment, however; therefore the ego has to spend a 
great deal of time avoiding pain and danger. As attractive as certain things are, others 
are equally repulsive. 

5. Caught in a whirlwind of seeking pleasure and avoiding pain, the person achieves 
many goals. The years pass, and separation does not even seem to be a problem 
anymore. However, there is an end to all this acquiring, all this experience for the sake 
of experience. Over it all looms the certainty that life will end. Fear of death becomes 
a source of suffering because death is the undeniable reminder that the ego's strategy 
for survival never solved the original problem — ignorance about how things really 
work. 

If it is true that the five kleshas are still at work — and who could deny that they are? — then 
the influence of the soul is crucial. 



Each klesha has its own momentum. We all know the powerful addiction of money, 
power, career, and ego needs of every type. This momentum has kept suffering alive despite 
the enormous changes in human existence from age to age. Against this momentum the soul 
provides a means of solving every cause of pain: 

1 . Ignorance of reality is solved by delving deeper into the mind. Awareness dives 
deeper than the material level to find its roots. 

2. Identification with ego is solved by learning to identify with these deeper levels. 

3. and 4. Attraction to outside objects — and repulsion from them — is solved by valuing 
the inner life above all. 

4. Fear of death is solved when the soul is experienced directly, since the soul is never 
born and never dies. 

As with the five causes of suffering, the five solutions all grow from the first one. If you 
explore the true nature of reality, all pain will eventually come to an end. In some form or 
other, religious teachings state this truth over and over. There is no way around the fact that it 
sounds abstract, yet this is the reality of how the soul operates. Your soul deals in abstractions 
like eternity and infinity so that you won't have to. It converts an inconceivable world into one 
that we can grasp and understand. Like a car's transmission, which takes the whirling motion 
of the engine and transforms it into the forward velocity that gets you where you want to go, 
the soul makes it possible for your life to move forward. Eternity doesn't need to breathe; 
infinity doesn't need to find a job. But you need those things and more — you need to eat, 
work, love, and raise children — and these are made possible through the soul. Without it, 
there would only be quantum soup, a formless swirl of energy and particles. 

Now let's see if we can test this new conception of the soul against tradition. Even though 
we are accustomed to using religious language about the soul, its duties are useful, not poetic. 
This fact has been hard to realize because the word soul has been used loosely to mean a 
person's deepest emotions, his heart, his highest aspirations, as well as more arcane things like 
the Holy Ghost. In the Bible, where the word soul is used hundreds of times, we find that it 
goes through every struggle of life. In the Old Testament we hear a lot about the peril of the 
soul. Satan wants to grab it, the enemies of Israel want to destroy it, famine and illness make 
the soul heavy, and always there is the plea — this is heard over and over in the Psalms — for 
God to give balm and solace to the soul. Jehovah is fickle, however, and he can seem to 
betray even those souls offered up to him: the Book of Job begins with God and the devil 
gambling with the soul of a righteous man "who feared God and set his face against 
wrongdoing." For no other reason than to test him, God allows Satan to inflict any harm he 
wishes against Job except to "touch his person." Job's travails with sickness, poverty, family 
misfortune, and social rejection describe a condition of suffering that was familiar to the 
Hebrews and later to the Christians; the fact that God never again speaks in the Bible is an 
ominous after-note: the soul has been left to survive its tests alone. 

The New Testament continues the same drama but more in terms of salvation and 
redemption. Since Jesus offers an explicit promise of an afterlife, going to heaven is the goal 
of the soul, and escaping damnation is its greatest challenge. In all this turmoil, one senses 
that the soul travels through life undergoing every anxiety felt by the person. It isn't aloof or 
apart but very much down here in the mud of battle. The paradox is that throughout this 
highly emotional involvement, no biblical writer ever defines what the soul is. As a result, the 
word remains as diffuse in the end as it was at the outset. If I say to you, "My soul was 
touched" or "I mean this from the bottom of my soul" or "That person has a lot of soul," 
nothing specific is being conveyed. 



I would venture that the sacred masters, whatever religion they are associated with, were 
trying to be quite specific. In their awareness the soul meant something much like what we 
have been describing — a connection between the world of the live senses and a world of 
inconceivable things like eternity, infinity, omniscience, grace, and every other quality of the 
unmanifest. 

Parables are basically coded stories about the soul and its function. In other words, they 
take an abstraction like "the unmoving starts to move" or "the immortal pretends to be bom" 
and expresses it in language that is more understandable. Some parables are so simple that we 
hardly realize their spiritual meaning — every child has heard about the six blind men and the 
elephant. Each blind man grabs a different part of the beast. The blind man who grabs the leg 
says, "An elephant is very like a tree." The one who grabs the trunk says, "An elephant is very 
like a snake." The one who grabs the tail says, "An elephant is very like a rope," and so forth. 
Originally the story had to do with the five senses and the mind being unable to grasp the 
nature of God, the moral being that divine reality was too vast to be understood by thought, 
sight, sound, touch, or taste. Other interpretations hold that the blind men are the branches of 
Vedic philosophy, which in all their specialized learning cannot grasp the wholeness of 
Brahman, the One and All. 

Jesus told thirty-nine parables, and these are easier to connect with the soul, largely 
because he delivered the morals himself. The first one is in the fifth book of Matthew: 

You are light for all the world. A town that stands on a hill cannot be hidden. When a 
lamp is lit, it isn't put under a bushel basket but on the stand, where it gives light to 
everyone in the house. And you, like the lamp, must shed light among all men, so that 
when they see the good you do, they may give praise to your Father in heaven. 

On the surface this parable is so simple that it hardly needs to be interpreted. The phrase 
"don't hide your light under a bushel basket" means that virtue should be seen so it can have a 
good effect. But the word light has a deeper meaning spiritually, in the sense of awakened 
awareness, and therefore this is also a parable about the soul. Jesus is saying that like a lamp 
hidden under a basket, the body hides the soul. He tells the disciples not to let this happen but 
to allow the soul's awareness to manifest itself. In other words, live from the soul level if you 
expect other people to believe that you are connected to God, for when they see that you are, 
they will believe it of themselves as well. 

Any of the other famous parables, whether about the mustard seed or the prodigal son or 
the servant who buries his talents, are equally multidimensional. The actors in them can be 
seen as aspects of the soul. In fact, these vignettes are so effective and colorful that the soul 
gets overlooked. The same happens in real life. It is very hard to realize that our origin, our 
source, is not of this world. Here I am with all my qualities. People see me and hear me; they 
believe in my existence. Yet my reality is paper-thin at the quantum level, where there is no 
sound, sight, texture, color, or anything else recognizable. The soul is the junction point 
between my virtual self and my physical self. It is the organizing intelligence that keeps me 
intact. This is an exceptional feat, given that every atom of my body is pure empty space with 
flashes of energy passing through it for no more than a few millionths of a second. 

Reality is truly sneaking up on us from nowhere and catching us off guard at every second. 
(In a beautiful aphorism the great Bengali poet Tagore says, "Life is only the perpetual 
surprise that I exist.") It is unsettling to confront the fact that none of my cherished qualities 
are real, yet it is a fact. Let us say that I like the color blue, feel happy, and value my personal 
freedom. These are three disparate qualities about me. But when I get in my car and drive 
across town, does the color blue move with me? When I take a bath, does my happiness get 
wet? When I go to bed, does my personal freedom go to sleep? 



It was just this sort of questioning that made the ancient sages realize that we must possess 
a soul. There is something intangible and undefined about us that yet gets born into this world 
as a visible, defined creation. In the Bhagavad-Gita this aspect is called the "inward dweller" 
and it is said that fire cannot burn it, water cannot make it wet, wind cannot blow it away, and 
a sword cannot cut it in two. For all the poetry in that expression, the fact of the soul appears 
to be undeniable, for stripped of all religious connotations, the essence of each person cannot 
be reduced to matter or thoughts or any fixed quality. 

If you try to do without the soul, you wind up with a handful of nothing. To underscore 
this, I need to bring back the concept of the field. A magnet attracts iron because it creates a 
magnetic field around itself. As we saw before, the field doesn't move, yet the iron does. If 
you tried to locate the exact point where the unmoving field touches the moving iron, where 
would you be? The answer is that you would be at the point of uncertainty. A very definite 
object, a piece of iron, is interacting with a completely undefined thing, a field. The two get 
closer and closer. The iron starts out as a solid lump of matter with weight and motion. The 
field starts out with no solidity or motion, or any other material qualities. They approach, and 
of course neither one wants to give up its nature. The field wants to remain boundless, 
timeless, and undefined. The iron wants to remain exactly the opposite. Inevitably, they meet 
as strangers, barely shaking hands, suspicious of each other. This is the famous region of 
uncertainty defined by Heisenberg, where the defined world meets the undefined field. What 
can you say about it? Only that it connects two very different worlds without living in either. 

At this point of uncertainty, a photon may shoot out of a star to travel across the universe, 
yet nothing really travels. Only a certain charge flickers into existence, passes its energy to 
another charge, and disappears again. It's the same trick as the television seeming to be 
populated by living people. Only in this case the trick isn't just a trick. It is as real as anything 
gets. Or to put it another way, as unreal as anything gets. There is a Zen story about two 
disciples who are looking at a flag fluttering in the breeze. "See that?" one says. "No one can 
doubt that the flag is moving." The other disagrees, "No, it is the wind moving. The flag has 
no motion of its own." 

They continue this debate until the master comes along, and he says, "You are both wrong. 
Only consciousness is moving." This is the kind of tale that often gets repeated as the answer 
to a Zen riddle, but which no one really understands. Now we are in a position to see the 
point. The flag stands for any material object that seems to move, the wind is the invisible 
field or force that creates that motion, but in the deeper reality, neither is moving. Only 
consciousness — which means intelligence — is at work, here and in all things. 

It is profound to realize that my true self is not rooted in time and space. Virtual reality is 
my source, and like a light wave my body flows out of it, but the source doesn't go anywhere. 
Therefore my connection to that source doesn't go anywhere, either. Thus the soul is part of 
me, but not any part my senses will ever detect. No religious claim is being made here; these 
are stubborn quantum facts. I have never left my source; it is always with me. The famous 
detachment of great sages comes from knowing full well that they are not confined by any 
fixed definition. Tagore has a beautiful way of expressing this: 

When I was born and saw the light 
I was no stranger in this world — 

Something inscrutable, shapeless, and without words 
Appeared in the form of my mother. 

So when I die, the same unknown will appear again 
As ever known to me.... 

GATANJALI 



The metaphor of birth is totally appropriate, because the timeless doesn't just turn into 
time. Something entirely new is born. Infinity doesn’t merely shrink until it becomes small 
and manageable — numberless dimensions give birth to just three or four. What you call your 
soul manages this birth, not once but thousands of times per second. I call this concept 
"genesis now." There can never be a single genesis, since virtual reality would just swallow 
everything back up again. Super-gravity, like an immense yawning black hole, has an 
insatiable appetite. It wants to devour time and make it timeless; it wants to engulf matter and 
energy to return them to virtual photons. 

Why isn't the whole world swallowed up? Because creation insists on happening. Life can't 
be stopped, even by the infinite forces arrayed against it. Genesis now is the ongoing project 
that is behind all your actions. Soul work never stops. Attempting to put yourself in a box, 
defining yourself by labels and qualities until you are a finished product once and for all, is as 
false as trying to put God in a box. The great spiritual traditions have been trying to tell us this 
with all their teachings. We otherwise would forget that the constant churning of eternity, 
infinity, and immortality is all that is happening. 

There is nothing else. This alone makes us real. 


THE STATE OF UNION 


Believe it or not, we find ourselves very close to the soul now. We have whittled away the 
scientific objections to God by placing him outside the reach of measurement. This means that 
a person's subjective experience of God can't be challenged — at the quantum level, objectivity 
and subjectivity merge into each other. The point of merger is the soul; therefore knowing 
God comes down to this: like a photon nearing a black hole, your mind hits a wall as it tries to 
think about the soul. The soul is comfortable with uncertainty; it accepts that you can be two 
places at once (time and eternity); it observes cosmic intelligence at work and is not bothered 
that the creative force is outside the universe. We have a simple picture of the situation, then: 


Mind 


► Soul 


(. jod 


The mind is creeping closer and closer to the soul, which sits on the edge of God's world, 
at the event horizon. The gap of separation is wide when there is no perception of spirit; it 
grows smaller as the mind figures out what is happening. Eventually the two will get so close 
that mind and soul have no choice but to merge. When that happens, the resemblance to a 
black hole is striking. To the mind, it will be as if falling into God's world lasts forever, an 
eternity in bliss consciousness. From God's side, the merging takes place in a split second; 
indeed, if we stand completely in God's world, where time has no meaning, the whole process 
never even occurred. The mind was part of the soul all along, only without knowing it. 


One could rightfully claim that the words of Jesus, "Ask and you will receive, knock and 
the door will open," are an iron law. The instant that your mind pays any attention to the soul, 
it is pulled toward it, with the inevitable result that all separation will close. Subjectively this 
journey toward the soul (a better phrase than journey of the soul) is perceived as the seven 
stages that we have already covered. But objectively, the process is much more like a particle 
of light crossing the event horizon. 

The fact that our minds can register this journey is astonishing, because the whole time that 
it is happening, ordinary thought and perception continue. Two shoppers pushing grocery 
carts are doing the same thing in the material world, but one could be having an epiphany. 

The word ecstasy derives from Greek roots that mean to stand apart or outside — this is the 
role of second attention, to stand outside material life and witness the dawn of ecstasy. If you 
regard the soul as a kind of force field steadily pulling the mind toward it, every one of the 
seven stages can be described as the closing of separation: 


Stage One: 
Stage Two: 
Stage Three: 
Stage Four: 
Stage Five: 

Stage Six: 

Stage Seven: 


lam in such separation that I sense deep fear inside. 

I don 't feel so separate; I am gaining a sense of power. 

Something larger than me is drawing near; I feel much more peaceful. 

I am beginning to intuit what that larger thing is — it must be God. 

My actions and thoughts are drawing on God's force field, as if we are both 
involved in everything. 

God and I are almost together now, I feel no separation; my mind is God's 
mind. 

I see no difference between myself and God. 


In ancient India this closing of the gap was described as yoga or union (the same Sanskrit 
root gave us the verb "to yoke"). Because the Indian sages had thousands of years to analyze 
it, the entire process of joining with the soul was turned into a science. Yoga precedes 
Hinduism, which is a particular religion, and at its inception, the practices of Yoga were 
intended to be universal. The ancient sages had at their disposal the power to witness their 
own spiritual evolution, which boiled down to watching the mind approach the soul. What 
they discovered can be stated in a few cardinal points: 

1 . Evolution takes place inside. It isn't a matter of pilgrimages, observances, and obeying 
religious rules. No codes of conduct can alter the fact that every mind is on a soul 
journey. 

2. Evolution is automatic. In the larger view, the soul is always pulling at us. Its force 
field is inescapable. 

3. A person is required to pay attention. Since the journey to the soul happens only in 
awareness, if you block out awareness you impede your progress; if you pay attention, 
you build up momentum. 

4. The final goal is inevitable. No one can resist the soul forever. Saints and sinners are 
on the same road. 

5. It is better to cooperate than to resist. The soul is the source of truth and love. If you 
try to avoid it, those things will not increase in your life. If you cooperate, your life 
will be organized with the help of infinite power and intelligence as it flows from God. 

6. External action still counts. Action is a physical process linked to the mind; the two 
cannot be separated, so even though this is a journey of the mind, outer activity either 
helps or detracts. 



None of these statements is startling (or particularly Indian). The fact that Yoga was later 
identified with extremely esoteric practices is secondary. Because it started out as a neutral 
way of describing the reality of spiritual awakening, Yoga is no less and no more objective 
than our quantum model; in both cases one is concerned with how ordinary reality alters the 
closer one gets to the event horizon. This might be a good place to mention, for those who do 
not already know, that the physical exercises gathered under the name of Hatha Yoga 
constitute the smallest part of a huge body of understanding; they are not necessary on the 
spiritual journey, yet they are highly useful to those who feel attracted in that direction. 

If you accept that Yoga is accurate in its description, then any aspect of life can be filtered 
through it. Let me take the issue of identity and view it in terms of initial separation that 
gradually becomes a state of union: 


IDENTITY 


Stage One: 
Stage Two: 
Stage Three: 
Stage Four: 
Stage Five: 
Stage Six: 
Stage Seven: 


I am small and insignificant, stranded on the vast expanse of 
Nature. I hope I can survive. 

I can do more than survive; I can compete and fulfill more of 
my needs. 

I am peaceful inside. My inner world is beginning to satisfy 
me more than outward things. 

I am self-sufficient. Things may not always go my way, but 
that doesn 't shake me anymore. 

I have discovered how to manifest my desires from within. My 
inner world turned out to have power. 

Six: I am at the center of an immense scheme of Power and 
intelligence that emanates from God. 

I am. 


You can accurately graph a person's spiritual growth on this scale alone. The ego moves 
from an isolated, helpless state to a realization that it might have power; then it looks for 
where the power comes from, at first deciding that it must be external, in the form of money 
and status, but in time realizing that the source of power is internal. More time passes and the 
difference between inner and outer power dissolves. All of reality is perceived as having one 
source; in the end, you are that source. Let's try another issue, that of faith: 


FAITH 


Stage One: 
Stage Two: 
Stage Three: 
Stage Four: 
Stage Five: 
Stage Six: 
Stage Seven: 


Faith is a matter of survival, If I don 't pray to God, he can 
destroy me. 

I'm beginning to have faith in myself. I pray to God to help 
me get what I want. 

Faith brings me peace. I pray that life should be free from 
turmoil and distress. 

I have faith that inner knowledge will uphold me. I pray for 
more insight into God's ways. 

Faith tells me that God will support my every desire. I pray 
that I am worthy of his faith in me. 

Faith can move mountains. I pray to be God's instrument of 
transformation. 

Faith melts into universal being. When I pray, I find that I am 



praying to myself. 


Notice how strikingly different the same word is in each stage. When people say that they 
have faith or that they believe in prayer, you cannot be certain what they mean without more 
understanding. This accounts for why there is such wild divergence of opinion about whether 
God listens to prayers and answers them. In relative terms, it all depends on your level of 
consciousness. At lower levels the thoughts behind a prayer may be too diffuse to create a 
result. As separation closes, the gap between prayer and result is closed, too; every prayer is 
answered. At the level of miracles prayer has the power to alter outward events. Finally, in the 
state of unity consciousness, there is no need for prayer. Your every thought comes from the 
soul; therefore you would only be praying to yourself. 

A boundary is the same as a horizon. If you attempt to walk around the world, the horizon 
is the farthest boundary of your sight, yet it keeps advancing ahead of you as you move. The 
spiritual equivalent is stated eloquently in a verse from the mystical Catholic monk Thomas 
Merton: 

The Lord travels in all directions at once. 

The Lord arrives from all directions at once. 

Wherever we are, we find that He has just departed. Wherever we go, we find that He 

has just arrived before us. 

In literal terms this verse states two things. One we already know: God is elusive because 
he exists in the domain of uncertainty, where time and space aren't fixed. The other is that 
God is always perceived within boundaries. We get only a limited idea of him, and that 
limited idea keeps shifting. There is no cure for this misperception until the final stage of 
unity; until then, the gap of separation keeps causing the mind to think it knows God when 
only partial knowledge is available. In shorthand form, here are the horizons that limit our 
vision in the seven stages: 

Stage One: Horizon of Fear 

I provide for the necessities and look out for myself. But when I get anxious, I feel 
lost. Only God knows why bad things happen in this world. 

Bounded by anxiety, insecurity, dependency. 

Stage Two: Horizon of Control 

I exert power and relish competition as a way of fulfilling my ambitions. But when 
things get beyond my control, I am totally frustrated. Only God knows why things 
don't work out the way I plan. 

Bounded by guilt, duty, victimization. 

Stage Three: Horizon of Fatalism 

I'm at peace with myself and know what is happening with me inside. But I lose my 
center when nothing makes sense anymore. Only God knows why destiny can be so 
cruel and capricious. 

Bounded by karma, introversion, lack of power. 

Stage Four: Horizon of Self-deception 



I navigate through the world with much more intuition and insight than most 
people. But I can be misled by my inner voice at times. Only God knows why my 
intuition deceives me just when I need it most. 

Bounded by hidden secrets, past conditioning, ego needs. 


Stage Five: Horizon of Fantasy 

My inner world is rich with new discoveries, and I have enough awareness to see 
that my thoughts come true. But some of my deepest wishes stay on the level of 
unreachable fantasies. Only God knows why this happens. 

Bounded by self-absorption, grandiosity, playing God. 

Stage Six: Horizon of Identity 

My whole life is devoted to service, and I can be selfless in the face of great 
demands from others. But sometimes the suffering of humanity makes me want to 
escape this world. Only God knows why I can't lose myself in him all the time. 

Bounded by thought, personal ego, traces of old conditioning. 

Stage Seven: Infinity — No Horizon 

I see no difference between my mind and the mind in all things. My identity is one 
with all people. Only God knows that I am merged into him in all dimensions at all 
times. 

Boundless. 

Perhaps this is the most telling "chart" of all, because we identify so completely with our 
boundaries. The horizon is fluid, however. Each stage breaks the boundaries of the one that 
came before. To someone in stage two, where guilt serves to keep the ego from going mad 
with power, the absence of guilt doesn’t seem possible. It would be a sure sign that stage three 
is looming should the person successfully find real forgiveness. Forgiveness is a mark of 
stage three, and those who arrive there have pushed their projection of God just a little further. 

Society tends to cluster, like seeking like. At a party of psychiatrists, everyone believes in 
insight; at a party of entrepreneurs, everybody believes in success. This makes it hard to 
accept that God's values are any different. We all know marriages where both spouses are sure 
that the world is a certain way, whether it be dangerous, unsafe, abundant, benign, or blessed. 
Is this a form of organized deception? Yes and no. Although your boundaries define you, that 
shouldn't be taken as negative; every stage of inner growth allows you the opportunity to see 
things that are hard to see. Projection is inevitable and very powerful. 

The boundaries of belief are true event horizons, because the mind can't go beyond them, 
even though to an outsider the boundaries don't exist. A fundamentalist Christian may be 
unable to conceive of divorce without believing that he will be thrown outside God's grace, 
just as an Orthodox Jew would find it inconceivable to break kosher laws or a Muslim to 
allow his wife to walk outside with her face uncovered. A stage one interpretation of Christ, if 
it reflects fear, would center on the times he warns of sinners "cast into the outer darkness 
with wailing and gnashing of teeth." A stage one interpretation of Allah centers on the 
Koran's promise that one sin against God's laws is enough to deserve eternal damnation. 

These beliefs defy reason, and that is their purpose. Religions have always feared the end 
of faith. (Recently some Protestant sects attempted to remove all references in the liturgy to 
original sin and human imperfection, but they failed, even among liberal theologians. The 



winning argument was that only God is perfect and we should never forget it.) Obedience 
holds the religious world together and makes redemption possible. For God to have his place, 
human beings must know theirs. 

In every stage the essential point is the same: You believe that God is holding you back for 
some reason. As long as you are in that stage, you will wrestle with what the reason is; this 
forms the core of your personal drama. In truth you are projecting all boundaries; this 
becomes obvious when you see that other people have boundaries totally different from yours. 

The end of separation is preordained. Eventually there is no more need for boundaries. The 
event horizon gets pushed as far as the mind will go, and after that God must take over. The 
word mystical is used carelessly to describe many different things, but I would say that in any 
stage of inner growth, whatever lies outside your boundaries is mystical to you. The famous 
cargo cult among the Trobrian islanders in the Pacific derived their religion when Allied 
planes dropped supplies from the sky during World War II. Being unable to comprehend what 
an airplane is, the islanders built straw effigies of them and prayed for their return. What was 
ordinary technology to us was across the event horizon for them. 

Even when you find yourself stagnated in fixed beliefs, the possibility of closing the gap is 
always present. Every morning you have a new opportunity to know God. Your starting point 
may be one of fear and guilt, or it may be one of expanded awareness — that is all relative. 
According to our three ways of finding God, no one is ever trapped without hope: 

1 . We can always cross the horizon to a new reality. 

2. Clues are left to tell us how to grow. 

3. Second attention enables us to read these clues. 

The saint is equal to the sinner in this regard. Both are guided by God from across the gap. 


THE POWER OF INTENTION 


The aim of spirituality is to learn to cooperate with God. Most of us have been raised to do the 
opposite. Our skills and abilities come from first attention and not second. As a result, our 
issues tend to center on the lower stages, where fear and neediness, however much we deny 
them, take their toll. In these early stages the ego asserts its needs with great force — money, 
security, sex, and power make huge claims on everyone in society. It is important to realize 
that God doesn’t judge against these things — when people feel that they owe their success to 
God, they are right. When wrongdoing goes unpunished and good deeds are ignored, God 
smiles on both. There is only one reality, which is spiritual, and nothing lies outside God’s 
mind. We tap into the source of creativity and intelligence with every thought. 

What makes a life spiritual, then? 

The difference is entirely one of intention. I began this book by saying that two people 
could be followed around from birth to death with a camera, and there would be no external 
way to show which one believed in God. This fact remains true. Unless you become a recluse 
or enter a monastery, your social role is irrelevant to how spiritual you are. Everything 
depends on intention. If someone uses kind words but intends to snub you, the intention cuts 
through. The most expensive gift cannot make up for lack of love. We know instinctively 
when intentions come from an honest place or a place of deception. 

In spiritual life, intention includes will and purpose, aspiration and highest vision. If you 
set your intention toward God, spirit grows. If you set your intention toward material 
existence, that will grow instead. Once you plant the seed of an intention, your soul's journey 



unfolds automatically. Here are the basic intentions that mark a spiritual life, stated in terms 
of what a person wants to achieve: 

1 . I want to feel God's presence. This intention is rooted in the discomfort of being 
isolated and separate. When God is absent, the underlying feeling of loneliness cannot 
be escaped. You can mask it by developing friendships and family ties. Ultimately, 
however, each of us needs to feel a sense of inner fullness and peace. We want to be 
satisfied within ourselves, no matter if we are alone or in a crowd. 

2. I want God to aid and support me. God's presence brings with it the qualities of spirit. 
At the source, every quality — love, intelligence, truth, organizing ability, creativity 
becomes infinite. The growth of these things in your life is a sign that you are 
approaching closer to your soul. 

3. I want to feel connected to the whole. The soul's journey takes a person from a 
fragmented state to a state of wholeness. This is felt as being more connected. Events 
around you start to weave into a pattern. Small details fit together instead of being 
scattered and random. 

4. I want my life to have meaning. Existence feels empty in separation, and this gets 
healed only by moving into unity with God. Instead of turning outward to find your 
purpose, you feel that just being here, as you are, fulfills the highest purpose in 
creation. 

5. I want to be free of restrictions. Inner freedom is greatly compromised when fear is 
present, and fear is a natural outcome of separation. As you move closer to your soul, 
the old boundaries and defenses start to melt away. Instead of being wary about the 
future, you flow with the river of life, awaiting the day when no boundaries of any 
kind hold you back. 

If these basic intentions are present inside you, God takes the responsibility for carrying 
them out. Everything else you do is secondary. Someone who is in the grip of fear, for 
example, cannot move beyond stage one, despite good deeds, a secure home life, and positive 
thinking. We all attempt to mask our limitations with false attitudes; it is only human nature to 
try to appear better than we are, especially in our own eyes. But once you set your intention in 
the right direction, self-deception is rendered irrelevant. You will still have to face your ego 
needs; you will still continue to play out your personal dramas. This activity takes place on 
the stage of first attention; offstage, spirit has its own devices — your intention is like a 
blueprint handed to God, which he carries to completion in his own fashion. Sometimes he 
uses a miracle; sometimes he just makes sure you don't miss the plane to New York. The fact 
that anything can happen is the beauty and surprise of the spiritual life. 

Strangely, people who feel extremely powerful and successful often set the worst 
intentions in motion, as far as spiritual growth is concerned. Here are some typical intentions 
that have nothing to do with finding God: 

I want to win. 

I want to prove myself by taking risks. 

I want to have power over others. 

I want to make the rules. I want to be in control. 

I want to do it all my way. 

These intentions should sound very familiar since they are repeated ad nauseam in popular 
fiction, advertising, and the media. They all center on ego needs, and as long as your real 
intentions come from that level, your life will follow suit. Such is the fate of living in a mirror 



universe. One meets hundreds of people who mistake their own intentions because their egos 
have taken complete control. Some of the most powerful figures in the world are spiritually 
quite naive. If intention is left to the ego, great things can be accomplished, but these are 
minuscule compared to what can be achieved with infinite intelligence and organizing power 
at your disposal. God is on the side of abundance. It is a great misfortune that the spiritual life 
has earned a reputation for being poor, reclusive, and ascetic. God is also on the side of 
increased happiness. The shadow of the martyr has fallen over spirituality with dire results. In 
general, to be spiritual in these times means going it alone, far more than in the past. In a 
society with misguided conceptions of God and no tradition of masters, you are responsible 
for setting your own intentions. 

Here are the ground rules that have proved effective for me personally and which I feel 
will work for many people: 

1 . Know your intentions. Look at the list of spiritual intentions above and make sure 
that you understand how important they are. Your destiny is to move in the direction 
of your soul, but the fuel that makes destiny move is intention. Intend for yourself that 
the gap of separation gets closed just a little more each day. Don't let your false 
intentions remain masked. Root them out and work on the anger and fear that keep 
you attached to them. False intentions take the form of guilty desires: I want someone 
else to fail, I want to get even, I want to see bad people punished, I want to take away 
something not my own. False intentions can be elusive; you will notice their existence 
by the feeling tone connected with them, a feeling of fear, greed, rage, hopelessness, 
and weakness. Sense the feeling first, refuse to buy into it, and then remain aware until 
you find the intention lurking beneath. 

2. Set your intentions high. Aim to be a saint and a miracle worker. Why not? The same 
laws of nature operate for everyone. If you know that the goal of inner growth is to 
acquire mastery, then ask for that mastery as soon as possible. Once you ask, don't 
strain to work wonders, but don't deny them to yourself, either. The beginning of 
mastery is vision; see the miracles around you and that will make it easier for greater 
miracles to grow. 

3. See yourself in the light. The ego keeps its grip by making us feel needy and 
powerless. From this sense of lack grows the enormous hunger to acquire everything 
in sight. Money, power, sex, and pleasure are supposed to fill up the lack, but they 
never do. You can escape this whole package of illusion if you see yourself not in a 
shadow fighting to get to God but as in the light from the first moment. The only 
difference between you and a saint is that your light is small and a saint's is great. This 
difference pales in comparison to the similarity: you are both of the light. The irony of 
near-death experiences is that when people come back to report how rapturously they 
felt bathed in a blinding light, they overlook that the light was there all along. It is the 
self. 

4. See everyone else in the light. The cheapest way to feel good about yourself is by 
feeling superior to others. From this dark seed grows every manner of judgment. 
Getting out of judgment is vital, and to plant that seed, you have to stop dividing 
others into categories of good and bad. Everyone lives in the same light. A simple 
formula may help here. When you are tempted to judge another person, no matter how 
obviously they deserve it, remind yourself that everyone is doing the best he can from 
his own level of consciousness. 

5. Reinforce your intentions every day. On the surface, the obstacles against spirit are 
enormous. Everyday life is a kind of swirling chaos, and the ego is entrenched in its 



demands. You cannot rely on one good intention to carry you through. It takes 
discipline to remind yourself, day in and day out, of your own spiritual purpose. For 
some people it helps to write down their intentions; for others periods of regular 
meditation and prayer are useful. It isn't good enough to repeat your intentions to 
yourself on the ran. Find your center, look closely at yourself, and do not let go of 
your intention until it feels centered inside yourself. 

6. Learn to forgive yourself. The ego has a way of co-opting spirit and pretending that 
everything is going well. Thus we all fall into traps of selfishness and delusion when 
least expected. The chance remark that wounds someone else, the careless lie, the 
irresistible urge to cheat are universal. Forgive yourself for being where you are. To be 
honestly a creature of stage two, driven by ambition and haunted by guilt, is more 
spiritual than pretending to be a saint. Apply to yourself the same dictum as to others: 
You are doing the best you can from your own level of consciousness. (I like to 
remember one master's definition of the perfect disciple: "One who is always 
stumbling but never falls.") 

7. Learn to let go. The paradox of being spiritual is that you are always wrong and 
always right at the same time. You are right to try to know God in every way you can, 
but you are wrong to think that things won’t change tomorrow. Life is change; you 
must be prepared to let go of today's beliefs, thoughts, and actions no matter how 
spiritual they make you feel. Every stage of inner growth is a good life. Each is 
nurtured by God. Only your second attention will know when it is time to move on, 
and when you know, don't hesitate to let go of the past. 

8. Revere what is holy. Our society teaches us to be skeptical of the sacred. The usual 
attitude toward miracles is a bemused caution; few people spend much time delving 
into the world's great wealth of scriptures. But every saint is your future, and every 
master is reaching over his shoulder to look at you, waiting for you to join him. The 
human representatives of God constitute an infinite treasure. Dipping into this treasure 
will help to open your heart. At just the moment when your soul wants to blossom, the 
words of a saint or sage may be the right fertilizer. 

9. Allow God to take over. When all is said and done, either spirit has power or it 
doesn't. If there is only one reality, nothing in the material world stands outside God; 
this means that if you want something, spirit can provide it. Deciding what part you 
need to do and what part God will do is delicate. It also changes from stage to stage. 
You have to know yourself in this regard; no one else can tell you what to do. Most 
people are addicted to worry, control, overmanagement, and lack of faith. On a daily 
basis, resist the temptation to follow these tendencies. Don’t listen to the voice that 
says you have to be in charge, that things aren't going to work out, that constant 
vigilance is the only way to get anything done. This voice is right because you listen to 
it too much. It won't be right if you let spirit try a new way. Be willing to experiment. 
Your intention is the most powerful tool at your disposal. Intend that everything will 
work out as it should, then let go and see if clues come your way. Let opportunities 
and openings come your way. Your deepest intelligence knows much more about what 
is good for you than you do. See if its voice is speaking to you. Maybe the outcome 
you are trying to force so hard isn't ultimately as good for you as the outcome that 
naturally comes your way. If you could give 1 percent of your life over to God every 
day, you would be the most enlightened person in the world in three months — keep 
that in mind and surrender something, anything, on a daily basis. 



10. Embrace the unknown. You are not who you think you are. Since birth your identity 
has depended on very limited experience. Over the years you formed likes and 
dislikes; you learned to accept certain limits. A hoard of objects acquired over time 
serves to prop up a fragile sense of fulfillment. None of this is the real you. Yet no one 
can instantly substitute the real for the false. It takes a process of discovery. Because it 
is painful to strip away so many layers of illusion, you have to let the unwinding of the 
soul take place according to its own rhythm and timing. Your overall attitude should 
be that the unknown is awaiting you, an unknown that has nothing to do with the "I" 
you already know. Some people reach the edge of illusion only at the moment of 
death, and then with a long look backward, one lifetime seems incredibly short and 
transient. 

Around 1890 a Blackfoot Indian chief was dying. His name was Isapwo Muksika 
Crowfoot, and he whispered these words into the ear of a missionary father: 

What is life? 

It is the flash of a firefly in the night, 

It is the breath of a buffalo in the winter time, 

It is the little shadow that runs across the grass 

And loses itself in the sunset. 

The part of us that we know already is the part that flickers out all too fast. Far better to 
seize this time and become timeless. When you feel a new impulse, an uplifting thought, an 
insight that you have never acted upon before, embrace the unknown. Cherish it as tenderly as 
a newborn baby. The unknown is the only thing that truly cares about the fate of your soul; 
therefore it would be good to revere it as much as you revere holiness. God lives in the 
unknown, and when you can embrace it fully, you will be home free. 


ENDNOTES AND 
FURTHER READING 


I drew from three vast areas of material for this book: religion, quantum physics, and 
neuroscience. Each contains its own mysteries and complexity. As I wove them together, I 
realized that many new doors were opening. The following notes are intended as a guide to 
readers who might wish to walk through some of these doors. I have favored imaginative 
readings here in the belief that there is more adventure in speculation than in conventional 



thinking. But I also feel that today's speculation will become accepted wisdom in the near 
future, and I invite the reader to join me in that belief. 

If any one thinker inspired me to write this book, it was the noted Dutch neuroscientist 
Herms Romijn, who has offered a beautiful synthesis of spiritual and scientific thought in his 
long article "About the Origins of Consciousness: A New Multidisciplinary Perspective on the 
Relationship Between Brain and Mind" (Amsterdam: Akademie van Weterschapen, June 23, 
1997, 100: 1-2, pp. 181-267). In this remarkable work, Romijn argues that conventional 
models for the brain fall far short of explaining the mind's basic operations, particularly 
memory. After testing the leading theories of mind against one another, Romijn favors a 
combination of quantum theory and ancient Vedanta, which together are the only way we can 
conceive of a universal mind that serves as the source for our own thoughts. With deep 
gratitude to him for his breakthrough speculations, I must also point out that Romijn does not 
make any religious arguments — the expansion of his ideas into the domain of God are purely 
my own. 


ONE. A REAL AND USEFUL GOD 


1 . A number of short answers to the question "What does the experience of God feel like?" 
can be found in Jonathan Robinson, Bridges to Heaven (Walpole, N.H.: Stillpoint Publishing, 
1994), pp. 54-62. Responses were all provided by spiritual writers and teachers. 

2. The beginning of "spiritual physics" is complex, and because quantum theory has now 
expanded into at least forty different and often conflicting interpretations, the whole subject 
remains extremely thorny. I first attempted to unravel the basic ideas in Quantum Healing 
(New York: Bantam Books, 1989), but for more technical resources, I can lead the reader to 
several books that have made a deep impression on me over the past decade. They are all 
classics in one way or another and recognized as starting points into the quantum maze. 

David Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980). 

Fritjof Capra, The Tao of Physics (Boston: Shambhala Press, 1991). 

Roger Penrose, The Emperor's New Mind (New York: Penguin USA, 1991). 

Michael Talbot, The Holographic Universe (New York: HarperCollins, 1991). 

Fred Alan Wolf, Star Wave: Mind Consciousness and Quantum Physics (New York: Macmillan, 1984). 

Gary Zukav, The Dancing Wu Li Masters (New York: Bantam Books, 1980). 

The best collection of original writings from great physicists on metaphysical matters was 
edited by Ken Wilber, Quantum Questions (Boston: Shambhala Press, 1984). Wilber went on 
to publish authoritative books about mysticism and physics that combine compassion and 
great depth of knowledge. A good appreciation of his insights can be gained from one of his 
earliest books and one of his most recent: Eye to Eye (Garden City, N.Y: Anchor Books, 
1983) and Eye of the Spirit (Boston: Shambhala Press, 1997). 

3. The Duke project, formally known as the Monitoring and Actualization of Noetic Training, 
presented its findings in fall 1998 to the American Heart Association. 

4. Readers will vary widely in how much quantum theory they'll wish to read about. For an 
introduction to the paradox of how light behaves, nothing is wittier or more palatable for the 
layman than a series of freshman physics lectures given by the late Nobel laureate Richard P. 
Feynman: Six Easy Pieces (New York: Addison- Wesley, 1995). Big Bang theory changes so 
rapidly that it is difficult to find an up-to-date treatment outside the pages of the journals 



Nature and Scientific American. I have relied upon Stephen Hawking, A Brief History of Time 
(New York: Bantam Doubleday Dell, 1988), now ten years old but still reliable in the 
essentials on how time and space came into existence. 

5. An eye-opening book on the many conflicting aspects of Jehovah, as he careens through the 
turmoil of the Old Testament, is Jack Miles, God: A Biography (New York: Vintage Books, 
1995). For a large compendium of modern spiritual writings, the reader is referred to Lucinda 
Vardey, ed., God in All Worlds (New York: Vintage Books, 1995). 

6. 1 am referring to students and devotees of Kabbalah. An introductory explanation of 
Shekhinah can be found in David S. Ariel, What Do Jews Believe? (New York: Shocken 
Books, 1995), pp. 22-23ff. 


TWO. MYSTERY OF MYSTERIES 


1 . Although there are thousands of written scriptures in the Indian tradition, much of the 
wisdom is passed down from master to disciple. The most inspiring modern example of this 
relationship, in my experience, can be found in Sudhakar S. Dikshit, I Am That (Durham: 
Acorn Press, 1973). But the reader is also referred to the many books centering on other 
notable voices of Vedanta, such as Sri Ramakrishna, Sri Aurobindo, Ramana Maharishi, 
Paramahansa Yogananda, J. Krishnamurti, and Maharishi Mahesh Yogi, to name some of the 
best-known exponents in the West of a five-thousand-year-old tradition. 

2. For the most literal translation of Christ's words I have relied upon the New English Bible 
translation, except for some instances where the King James version was inescapable, having 
become part of our language. For scriptural quotations outside the recognized gospels, see 
Ricky Alan Mayotte, The Complete Jesus (South Royalton, Vt.: Steerforth Press, 1997). I 
should also point out that all interpretations of Christ's words in this book are my own and not 
derived from any sect or authority. 

3. Hawking himself does not deal in the connections between spirituality and quantum 
physics. The latest and best summary of those connections is made in Paul Davies, The Mind 
of God (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1992). In this follow-up to his classic God and the 
New Physics, Davies deals with the central issue of whether an intelligent creator is consistent 
with modem cosmology. 


THREE. SEVEN STAGES OF GOD 


1 . An excellent discussion of addictions from the social and personality level can be found in 
Angelus Arrien, The Four-Fold Way: Walking the Paths of the Warrior, Teacher, Healer and 
Visionary (San Francisco: Harper San Francisco: 1993), which I have adapted to fit my 
spiritual argument. 

2. Sister Marie's miraculous feats are recounted in Patricia Treece, The Sanctified Body 
(Liguori, Mo.: Triumph Books, 1993), pp. 276-80. This is the most reliable, detailed account 
of miracle-working in the Catholic church over the past century. 



3. The deeply moving story of Father Maximilian is in Treece, Sanctified Body, pp. 140-43. 
She has also written a complete biography, A Man for Others (San Francisco: Harper and 
Row, 1982). 


FOUR. A MANUAL FOR SAINTS 


1. Griffith's experience is recounted in full in Vardey, ed., God in All Worlds, p. 88. 

2. My version of the night of Qadr is derived from Thomas W. Lippman, Understanding 
Islam (New York: Penguin/Meridian, 1995), pp. 38-39. 

3. Some of the first and best arguments for the "mind field" were made in Penfield’s The 
Mystery of the Mind (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1975). 

4. Fascinating connections are made between brain function and spiritual experiences in 
Valerie V. Hunt, Infinite Mind (Malibu, Calif: Malibu Publishing, 1996). 

5. 1 am making a strong argument for the notion that mind is not localized in the brain but 
extends like a force field beyond space and time. To make this argument, I have relied upon 
the most eloquent thinker on nonlocalized mind, Rupert Sheldrake. His major work to date is 
The Presence of the Past (New York: Times Books, 1988), but readers will be drawn to his 
more informal conversations on science and spirituality in Michael Fox and Rupert Sheldrake, 
Natural Grace (New York: Doubleday, 1996). 

Sheldrake is unique in offering ingenious experiments that would prove the existence of 
the mind field (he refers to it as the field of morphogenesis). The most recent proposals, 
which invite the reader to participate, appear in his book Seven Experiments That Could 
Change the World (New York: Riverhead Books, 1995). 


FIVE. STRANGE POWERS 


1. Dr. Bruce L. Miller reported his findings in the April 1998 issue of the journal Neurology. 

2. The best popular writing on this mystery is still found in Oliver Sacks, The Man Who 
Mistook His Wife for a Hat (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1987). Connections between 
spiritual awakening and brain disease have been speculated about for a long time but never 
proven. A striking modern example, however, can be found in Suzanne Segal, Collision With 
the Infinite (San Diego: Blue Dove Press, 1996). 


SIX. CONTACTING GOD 


1 . Credible attempts to explain the soul in scientific terms are rare. The best is found in Gary 
Zukav, The Seat of the Soul (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1989). 



ABOUT THE AUTHOR 


Deepak Chopra has written twenty- five books, which have been translated into thirty-five 
languages. He is also the author of more than one hundred audio- and videotape series, 
including five critically acclaimed programs on public television. In 1999 Time magazine 
selected Dr. Chopra as one of the Top 100 Icons and Heroes of the Century, describing him as 
"the poet-prophet of alternative medicine." Dr. Chopra currently serves as CEO and founder 
of The Chopra Center for Well Being in La Jolla, California. (For information regarding The 
Chopra Center for Well Being, call 888-424-6772 or visit the Web site at www.chopra.com.) 

If you have enjoyed this book and would like the opportunity to explore higher realms of 
consciousness and have a more direct experience of divinity, you may do so interactively at 
Deepak Chopra's new Web site, www.mypotential.com. 



